pmc Curr Neuropharmacol Curr Neuropharmacol 555 currneuro CN Current Neuropharmacology 1570-159X 1875-6190 Bentham Science Publishers PMC10286584 PMC10286584.1 10286584 10286584 36918783 10.2174/1570159X21666230314142505 CN-21-1273 1 Neurology Melatonin as a Harmonizing Factor of Circadian Rhythms, Neuronal Cell Cycle and Neurogenesis: Additional Arguments for Its Therapeutic Use in Alzheimer’s Disease Shukla Mayuri 1 2 Vincent Bruno 1 3 * 1 Institute of Molecular Biosciences , Mahidol University , Nakhon Pathom 73170 , Thailand ; 2 Present Address: Chulabhorn Graduate Institute , Chulabhorn Royal Academy , 10210 , Bangkok , Thailand ; 3 Institute of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Laboratory of Excellence DistALZ, Université Côte d'Azur, INSERM , CNRS, Sophia-Antipolis , 06560 , Valbonne , France * Address correspondence to this author at the Institute of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Laboratory of Excellence DistALZ, Université Côte d'Azur, INSERM, CNRS, Sophia-Antipolis, 06560, Valbonne, France; Tel: +33493953454; Fax: +33493953408; E-mail: vincent@ipmc.cnrs.fr 12 4 2023 12 4 2023 21 5 438943 1273 1298 19 10 2022 07 12 2022 31 12 2022 12 10 2023 12 10 2023 11 10 2023 12 10 2023 © 2023 Bentham Science Publishers 2023 Bentham Science Publishers https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Bentham Science Publisher. This is an open access article published under CC BY 4.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode ) The synthesis and release of melatonin in the brain harmonize various physiological functions. The apparent decline in melatonin levels with advanced aging is an aperture to the neurodegenerative processes. It has been indicated that down regulation of melatonin leads to alterations of circadian rhythm components, which further causes a desynchronization of several genes and results in an increased susceptibility to develop neurodegenerative diseases. Additionally, as circadian rhythms and memory are intertwined, such rhythmic disturbances influence memory formation and recall. Besides, cell cycle events exhibit a remarkable oscillatory system, which is downstream of the circadian phenomena. The linkage between the molecular machinery of the cell cycle and complex fundamental regulatory proteins emphasizes the conjectural regulatory role of cell cycle components in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease. Among the mechanisms intervening long before the signs of the disease appear, the disturbances of the circadian cycle, as well as the alteration of the machinery of the cell cycle and impaired neurogenesis, must hold our interest. Therefore, in the present review, we propose to discuss the underlying mechanisms of action of melatonin in regulating the circadian rhythm, cell cycle components and adult neurogenesis in the context of AD pathogenesis with the view that it might further assist to identify new therapeutic targets. Keywords Melatonin circadian rhythm cell cycle Alzheimer’s disease neurogenesis therapeutic pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement no pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY 1 INTRODUCTION Several theories have been postulated with respect to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), a neurodegenerative disorder presenting a very peculiar conformity in terms of initiation of pathology and symptomology. The neurodegenerative countenances befall years before the symptoms show up, with the formation of senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles being contemplated as its characteristic pathological hallmarks. Given the prevalence of rhythmic anomalies during aging [ 1 ] and in neurodegenerative pathologies [ 2 ], the molecular circadian network directly influences the course of such states, thereby supporting the hypothesis that circadian disruption is one major symptom in neurodegenerative diseases [ 3 ]. Indeed, circadian rhythm upheaval is precisely involved in the etiopathogenesis and progression of AD, and alterations in this rhythm could conceivably presage the onset of dementia [ 4 ]. The zeitgebers-like light synchronizes the daily rhythms [ 5 ], which are generated in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) located in the ventral hypothalamus. Circadian rhythms are commanded by this principal pacemaker that controls the coordinated peripheral oscillators and regulates the physiological, biochemical, and behavioural activities. Studies have shown that apart from the hypothalamus, other regions in the brain, such as the hippocampus and the cortex, possess oscillators capable of generating circadian rhythms [ 6 , 7 ]. The crosstalk between the circadian clock and cellular signalling thereby contributes to the synchronization of circadian oscillations and physiological homeostasis [ 8 , 9 ]. It is interesting to point out that abnormal circadian rhythms are one of the characteristic features of not only AD but also of several other neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson’s disease (PD) and Huntington's disease (HD) [ 10 , 11 ], one extremely important aspect of the fundamental function of circadian clocks being the regulation of proteostasis, where altered daily rhythms could significantly influence and enhance pro-neurodegenerative molecular aggregations [ 12 ]. Moreover, the occurrence of circadian rhythm disruptions before the onset of typical clinical symptoms of neurodegeneration suggests that such rhythmic alterations are early events that might also be a potential risk factor for developing AD and PD [ 13 , 14 ]. The circadian system, therefore, could be a new diagnostic and therapeutic target in neurodegenerative disorders. As such, clinical trials become essential to determine whether circadian interventions could prevent or delay the onset of AD and related dementias [ 15 ] and if modulating the circadian state of brain cells susceptible to neurodegeneration could represent a possible anti-AD therapeutic track [ 16 ]. One additional important point is that adult neurogenesis, which is altered in AD [ 17 ], is under the control of the circadian system [ 18 ], thereby suggesting that restored neurogenesis could assist future innovative circadian rhythms-synchronizing treatments in alleviating AD-related cognitive symptoms. The cell cycle is a highly regulated process that maintains a homeostatic balance between cell proliferation and cell death and that consists of four phases G1 (cell growth), S (DNA replication), G2 (cell growth) and M (mitosis), the progression of which is under the control of cell cycle regulators that coordinate the transition from one phase to another [ 19 ]. Cell cycle oddity is an early feature of AD that has been extensively evidenced in the aetiology of the disease as manifesting abnormal cell cycle re-entry that precedes the pathological hallmarks of AD [ 20 - 22 ]. Thus, the neuronal cell cycle re-entry in humanized Aβ plaque-producing AppNLF knock-in mice results in the development of subsequent AD-related pathological events, including tauopathy, neuroinflammation, brain leucocytes infiltration, DNA damage response and neurodegeneration [ 23 ]. Neurons generally remain in the G0 phase (quiescent state), but toxic insults and different kinds of stressors force neurons to exit G0 and induce cell cycle re-entry leading to cell death via apoptosis. Cell cycle reactivation in adult neurons is a sign of neurodegeneration [ 24 ] and central nervous system (CNS) lesions [ 25 , 26 ], and the cell-cycle hypothesis of AD considers this disease a consequence of deregulation of the cell cycle in neurons. Although studies in rodents and primates have indicated that regulation of the cell cycle plays a crucial role in controlling area-specific neuron production [ 27 ], an aberrant reactivation of the cell cycle in these neurons initiates the complex process of apoptosis [ 28 ], which likely contributes to AD development [ 29 , 30 ] and is associated with the cardinal hallmarks of AD including tau hyper phosphorylation and amyloid beta (Aβ) accumulation [ 31 ] along with consequent degeneration of neurons [ 32 ]. The mechanistic features of the involved cell cycle machinery would thus aid in understanding its physiological and pathogenic implications in the disease state [ 33 ]. Melatonin is a key output of the circadian clock, a circadian regulator and plays a major role in peripheral clock synchronization due to its strong circadian expression pattern. Under direct control from the SCN, the pineal gland synthesizes and releases melatonin into circulation in response to darkness, where its secretion is known to be suppressed by light [ 34 ]. Also, animal studies showed that retinal melatonin plays an important role in the regulation of retinal daily and circadian rhythms [ 35 ]. The most direct route by which melatonin can reach the SCN is considered to be via the cerebrospinal fluid of the third ventricle. Melatonin can also reach the pars tuberalis (PT) of the pituitary, another melatonin-sensitive tissue, via this route. Melatonin, in turn, acts on the SCN by directly influencing the circadian clock mechanisms and by controlling circadian rhythms in association with molecular timing genes [ 36 ]. The hypothalamic high-affinity G protein-coupled melatonin receptors MT 1 and MT 2 are involved in the regulation of circadian rhythms, suggesting clinical applications of melatonin receptor-targeting drugs [ 37 ]. Moreover, findings from preclinical and clinical studies revealed some roles of melatonin in the control of the circadian clock-associated genes, thus suggesting that the hormone could have beneficial effects in AD patients via an improvement of their circadian rhythms given that AD pathogenesis involves atrophic alterations in the brain resulting in circadian disruptions [ 38 ]. Indeed, melatonin treatment has beneficial effects in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD patients with sleep disorders in improving sleep quality and in regulating the sleep/wake rhythm [ 39 ]. Melatonin has been recognized to alleviate pathogenic mechanisms in AD [ 40 ] by regulating several signalling pathways [ 41 ]. Recently, it has also been demonstrated that melatonin, by modulating specific pathways, might also play a role in cell cycle functions related to AD [ 42 ]. Moreover, a complete understanding of the interrelationship between AD and circadian rhythm disruption might concede for earlier identification of AD diagnostic [ 43 ]. Therefore, the present review emphasizes these two particular mechanisms, which can probably portend the onset of neurodegenerative diseases like AD and determine further clinical interventions. 2 MELATONIN, AGING AND AD 2.1 Melatonin and Normal Aging It is well established that melatonin secretion is maximum during brain development (from childhood to adolescence) and declines gradually over the lifespan with very low production at an advanced age [ 44 ]. This drop in melatonin levels occurs due to dysfunction of the suprachiasmatic nucleus or of the neuronal pathways of transmission to the pineal gland. As a consequence, aging is tightly associated with a weakening of the circadian system. In addition, because melatonin is a highly pleiotropic regulatory molecule that not only acts through its antioxidant properties but also plays important physiological and pharmacological roles in the control of neuronal plasticity and neuroprotection, its drop in level is expected to reduce adult hippocampal neurogenesis [ 45 ]. Moreover, the loss of amplitude of melatonin rhythm in advanced age is both an indicator as well as a cause of age-related disturbances in the circadian pacemaker leading to chronobiological disorders [ 46 ]. The effect of melatonin on aging-associated pathologies, with an emphasis on data from aged organisms and senescence-accelerated animals, has been extensively and critically reviewed [ 47 ]. In this context, the chronobiotic efficacy of exogenous melatonin has been demonstrated in both experimental models and clinical studies with validated recommendations for treatment purposes [ 48 ] and slowing the process of aging [ 49 ] and neurodegenerative diseases [ 50 ]. Importantly, age-specific preventive clinical and therapeutic applications of melatonin in newborns, children and adults based on its physiological regulatory effects have been substantiated to better understand the short- and long-term effects of melatonin following its immediate or prolonged release [ 51 ]. Moreover, the influence of endogenous and exogenous melatonin on the adolescent brain, with specific reference to the evolution of brain structure and functions, sleep regulation, and modulation of behaviors in health or disease, has been well described [ 52 ] and a review on the ongoing clinical trials on the effects of melatonin on circadian rhythms in young adults with at-risk symptoms has been provided [ 53 ]. However, the dosage paradigm and duration of exposure is the key to a better prognosis [ 54 ]. Recently, the benefits and adverse events of melatonin use in the elderly have been extensively discussed [ 55 ]. 2.2 Melatonin in AD and its Therapeutic Efficacy Disruptions in melatonin levels in the CSF, blood, saliva and urine, which occur with age and are more pronounced in AD, have been recently overviewed and summarized extensively [ 56 ]. Moreover, studies assessing the effect of melatonin on transgenic models of AD and clinical evaluations of melatonin treatment of MCI and AD patients have been well documented [ 57 ]. Furthermore, clinical analysis of melatonin therapy in AD patients [ 58 ] and meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of melatonin in AD pathology [ 59 ] gave insight into the therapeutic potential of melatonin and how the dosage regimen should be applied. Additional clinical investigations provide evidence to support the beneficial effects of melatonin on sleep disorders and cognitive deficits in AD patients [ 60 ]. On this point, it has been recently evidenced that sleep deprivation can be fatal due to an accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the gut in drosophila and mice [ 61 ]. Given the important roles played by melatonin in sleep regulation as well as its antioxidant power, these findings certainly reinforce the validity of the use of melatonin for the reduction of sleep disturbances and oxidative stress observed in AD. Besides, melatonin via its receptor activation can modulate the survival of newborn neurons in the adult hippocampus, making it the first known exogenously applicable substance with such specificity [ 62 ]. The beneficial therapeutic effects of melatonin for neurogenesis impairment and the associated underlying molecular mechanisms in aging and neurological disorders, including AD, have been comprehensively reviewed [ 40 , 63 ]. Moreover, because melatonin stimulates early and late stages of neurodevelopment in the adult brain and significantly enhances memory and cognitive functions, its beneficial effects in positively regulating neurogenesis in AD are more than likely [ 42 ]. The clinical efficacy of melatonin intervention for cognitive function in AD and its clinical effectiveness for cognitive function in healthy subjects has been systematically reviewed based on a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials with specific emphasis on the duration of melatonin intervention [ 64 ]. Recently, the developmental trends of melatonin therapies from preclinical studies for AD, the beneficial effects of melatonin on behavior in animal models of AD, and the clinical effects of melatonin on sleep, cognition, behavior, psychiatric symptoms, electroencephalography findings, and molecular biomarkers in patients with mild cognitive impairment and AD along with limitations of current melatonin therapies for AD from 1997 to 2021, have been examined [ 65 ]. 3 MELATONIN RESTORES THE CIRCADIAN EQUIPOISE IN AD 3.1 The Cell Cycle-circadian Rhythms Interplay Considering the underlying molecular mechanisms, circadian rhythms are conserved from drosophila to humans. The clock regulation of the cell cycle in the mammalian system is a multifactorial process, and any disruption in this system leads to changes in cell cycle characteristics. The functional clock components ubiquitously regulate optimal cell growth. Hence, any internal de-synchronization of the cerebral clocks results in pathophysiological alterations observed in many neurodegenerative disorders [ 66 ] where the aetiology and pathogenesis of AD and disrupted circadian rhythm share common factors [ 67 ]. First proposed to influence the timing of the cell cycle [ 68 ], the circadian clock later came to be known as a gating factor [ 69 ], the clock-dependent regulation of the cell cycle being an essential control mechanism. The reciprocal influence of the circadian clock and the cell cycle on each other suggests that these intertwined biological circuits are essential to ensure proper time-dependent mechanisms [ 70 ]. A few examples of such common regulatory proteins are mammalian Timeless protein (TIM), the mammalian silent mating type information regulation 2 homolog 1 (SIRT1), Period (Per) and Cryptochrome (Cry) that are all involved in the modulation of both circadian and cell cycles with overlapping functions. The major ‘clock’ genes include the period genes, Per1 and Per2, the cryptochrome genes, Cry1 and Cry2, the clock (circadian locomotor output cycles kaput) gene, and the Bmal1 (aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like) gene. Clock and Bmal1 heterodimers act on E-box components of the promoters of the Per and Cry genes to stimulate transcription [ 71 ]. 3.2 Melatonin’s Impact on Circadian Rhythms Melatonin levels decline with advancing age, and aging alters the properties of the core transcriptional clock, as evidenced in flies [ 72 ]. Recently, it has been observed that loss of rhythmic Klf4 expression, a crucial transcription factor, in aged macrophages is associated with disruption of circadian innate immune homeostasis, a mechanism that may underlie the age-associated loss of protective immune responses [ 73 ]. In this context, melatonin promotes the stabilization of core pluripotency factors, such as Nanog, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc, by preventing m6A-dependent mRNA decay [ 74 ]. This draws particular attention to the age-associated decline of melatonin levels, which indicates the aging-associated disruption of circadian gene regulation and function. In addition, not only is this hormone a vital tool in the elderly, but inhibition of maternal melatonin also changes the expression of brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1(Bmal1), Per2 and melatonin type-1 receptor in the foetal SCN [ 75 ]. These studies suggested that melatonin controls certain clock genes along with circadian rhythm (Fig. 1 ). As such, the change in expression patterns of clock genes marks the rate of the aging process, and regulation of this phenomenon by melatonin signalling is yet another mechanism of how this indoleamine controls age-associated rhythmic processing. 3.3 Melatonin Alleviates AD-associated Circadian Disruption It has been well recognized in rodent models that learning and memory have defined circadian variation throughout the day. Recently, circadian learning and memory performance has been evaluated using the single cosinor-based method in AD mice [ 76 ]. It has also been demonstrated in the 5XFAD model of AD that constitutive deletion of Rev-erbα (a circadian clock component and known as heme-responsive nuclear receptor protein) decreased amyloid plaque number and size and prevented plaque-associated amplification of disease-associated microglia markers, including Triggering Receptor Expressed On Myeloid Cells 2 (TREM2), lymphocyte common antigen (CD45) and C-Type Lectin Domain Containing 7A (Clec7a) [ 77 ]. Melatonin’s interaction with the proteasome and its involvement in the feedback loops (CRY/PER and REV-ERBα) [ 36 ] suggests another mechanism of how melatonin could possibly control Aβ clearance and neuroinflammation thus providing new insights into the role of circadian machinery in AD. Moreover, it has been previously shown that melatonin, at micro molar concentrations, potentiates the inhibitory effect of REV-ERB ligand SR9009 (which increases the constitutive repression of genes regulated by Rev-ErbA) in LX2 cells [ 78 ]. Although more exploration is needed to fully understand the relationship between melatonin and REV-ERBs in the context of neurodegeneration, significant disruptions of these interactions lead to altered memory performance and learning abilities, thereby suggesting that, by regulating circadian rhythms, melatonin could modulate learning and memory. Circadian rhythm disruptions are more pronounced in neurodegenerative diseases like AD and related dementias, where they occur before the onset of typical clinical symptoms of neurodegeneration [ 15 , 79 ]. Recently, the presence of circadian alterations and differences in long-term spatial memory, new object recognition memory and LTP, along with less robust locomotor activity rhythm, has been demonstrated in APP/PS1 mice [ 80 ]. During the early development of AD, there is a disruption of the normal expression of genes regulating circadian function after exposure to light, particularly in the SCN but also in extra-hypothalamic brain areas supporting circadian regulation, suggesting a severe impairment of the functioning of the clock gene pathway as investigated in a triple transgenic model of AD (3×Tg-AD) and their wild type littermates [ 81 ]. Importantly, the circadian redox regulation of neuronal excitability extends from the SCN to the hippocampus, which gives insights to understand the hippocampal circadian processes, such as learning and memory, along the course of aging and neurodegeneration [ 82 ]. It has also been observed that epigenetic alterations in the SCN and hippocampus elicit cognitive decline and memory impairments in rodents [ 83 ], while a study in an APP/PS1 transgenic mouse model of AD has evidenced that circadian disturbances might occur early during the stage of AD pathogenesis [ 80 ]. As such, an altered synchronization of circadian rhythmicity in the brain of AD patients has further reinforced the idea that circadian oscillators are key factors in the development of this devastating disorder [ 84 , 85 ]. Recent clinical evaluation of the regional distribution of Aβ in the brain by positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) standardized uptake value ratios (SUVRs) in normal healthy, MCI and AD dementia groups showed that in AD patients, the alterations in circadian rhythms are well associated with amyloid burden [ 86 ], which provides a clear-cut indication of how alterations in circadian rhythm result in neurodegeneration due to Aβ deposition. Importantly, this phenomenon runs parallel with the declining levels of melatonin observed in AD. Moreover, the deregulated diurnal variation in clock gene expression in the hippocampus corresponds with a loss of normal day/night differences in membrane excitability, synaptic physiology and cognition in APP transgenic mice [ 87 ]. As melatonin modulates circadian rhythms and regulates the Aβ biology in terms of production, conformational changes, oligomerization, fibrillation, and ultimately senile plaque formation [ 88 ], its therapeutic implementation seems legitimate [ 89 ]. Interestingly, tau function is also essential for the regulation of the circadian network and associated behaviours. Indeed, alterations in tau homeostasis deregulate the structural plasticity of the ventral lateral circadian pacemaker neurons by disrupting the temporal cytoskeletal remodelling of its dorsal axonal projections and by inducing a slight increase in the cytoplasmic accumulation of core clock proteins [ 90 ]. In this particular context, it has been shown that melatonin treatment in mouse and human ex vivo and in vivo tau-related models provides some beneficial effects and prevents cognitive decline [ 91 ]. Additionally, melatonin regulates tau phosphorylation by affecting the function of kinases and phosphatases [ 92 ] and reduces the aggregation propensity of tau by inhibiting its aggregation and dissolving the preformed aggregates [ 93 ]. Because altered circadian clocks act as a risk factor for the development of neurodegenerative diseases via an altered production or clearance rates of toxic metabolites such as Aβ, they could be potential therapeutic targets for attenuating the onsets and progressions of these disorders [ 94 ]. Supporting this possibility, a randomized clinical trial has revealed that interventions targeting the circadian system improve sleep, mood and behaviour in patients with AD and related dementias [ 95 ]. Since not only dysfunction in clock gene but also altered melatonin secretion has been reported in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases [ 96 ] and considering the interrelationship between the circadian clock and neurodegeneration, the prospects of using melatonin is of prime interest in the context of circadian disruption being an emerging link to the aetiology of AD [ 97 ]. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that melatonin has indeed been reported to regulate aging and neurodegeneration through circadian rhythm pathways [ 98 ]. 4 THE CIRCADIAN RHYTHM/CELL CYCLE/MELATONIN CONNEXION Several mammalian cell cycle genes, such as c-Myc, cyclin D1 and Wee- 1, are regulated in a circadian fashion [ 99 ] and mutations in various clock genes have been shown to result in the modulation of several cell cycle-associated genes [ 100 ]. As an example, Wee1 expression is controlled by the clock gene complex and contributes to cell-cycle progression. Wee1 is a critical coordinator of the transition between DNA replication and mitosis and yet another mitotic regulator that participates in the AD neurodegenerative process [ 101 ]. Therefore, it could be speculated that an aberrant expression of circadian clock genes can lead to atypical expression of their downstream targets that are involved in cell proliferation and apoptosis. As melatonin is itself a circadian regulator, it could possibly affect the downstream effectors of the circadian pathway both in physiological and pathological conditions. Importantly, the formation of the embryonic brain requires the production, migration, and differentiation of neurons to be timely and coordinated with both light and melatonin scheduling the differentiation of neurons and the formation of neural processes as seen in the habenular nuclei of zebra fish [ 102 ]. Interestingly, neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus occurs in a time-of-day dependent fashion, which may dictate daily modifications of dentate gyrus physiology. The hippocampus is subjected to diurnal/circadian rhythms on both the morphological and molecular levels. A study in the animal model showed that melatonin receptor type 1 and 2 (MT1/2)-mediated signaling appears to be crucial for the generation and timing of zeitgeber time-dependent changes in cell proliferation and apoptosis and for differentiation of proliferating cells into neurons in the sub granular zone (SGZ) [ 103 ]. Daily variations of neural progenitor divisions and neurogenesis in the adult mouse brain have been demonstrated. During night time, the progenitors actively enter M-phase, thereby giving rise to more neuronal progeny [ 104 ]. The possibility that light-controlled rhythms are a primary regulator of neuronal proliferation exemplifies the complexity of the circadian control pathway of the neuronal cell cycle [ 105 ]. Nevertheless, it has been shown in neurogenic niches of an adult diurnal vertebrate that the circadian modulation of cell cycle progression involves both systemic and niche-specific factors [ 106 ], implying that the cell cycle progression displays a robust circadian pattern. Another study in the dentate gyrus of knock-out mouse models provides insight into how cell autonomous circadian clocks and clock genes regulate adult neural stem cells with implications for treating neurodegenerative disorders and impaired brain functions by manipulating neurogenesis [ 107 ]. Therefore, understanding the circadian regulation of cell cycle machinery can help optimize the timing of therapeutic approaches in patients with neurodegenerative disorders. As the circadian molecular clock regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis by controlling the timing of cell-cycle entry and exit [ 108 ], it is of utmost importance to investigate the underlying mechanisms of this regulation and the functional role of melatonin as this neurohormone acts as both circadian and cell cycle regulator (Fig. 1 ). This is supported by the timing of gene expression for critical cell cycle regulators cyclins D, A2, and B2 and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p20 in brain tissue [ 106 ]. Also, cellular senescence is characterized by the altered expression of cell-cycle proteins, particularly the up-regulation of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors such as p16 and p21 [ 109 ]. Because the molecular clock in the melatonin-producing cells of the pineal gland plays a key role in modulating circadian behavior [ 110 ], since circadian clocks are considered potential therapeutic targets to attenuate onsets and progressions of neurodegenerative diseases like AD [ 94 ], and considering melatonin therapy as an advantageous modality in terms of therapeutics [ 111 ], using melatonin-based approaches to mitigate circadian rhythm disruptions in aging and neurodegenerative diseases would certainly delay the onset or abate the development of AD pathogenesis. 5 MELATONIN MITIGATES THE AD-DEPENDENT DEREGULATION OF THE CELL CYCLE MACHINERY 5.1 The Cell Cycle Balance is Disrupted in AD Neurogenesis involves proliferation and differentiation, which implies, in cell cycle terms, re-entering and exiting the cell cycle, these two processes being interlinked [ 112 ]. The neuronal fates are usually determined around their final cell cycle [ 113 - 115 ], and the proteins that drive or inhibit the cell cycle include cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKIs), DNA replication proteins and checkpoint proteins [ 116 ]. The cell cycle regulators in adult neurons are involved in functions such as neuronal migration, neuronal maturation and synaptic plasticity [ 117 , 118 ], and their enhanced expression in response to toxic insults and oxidative stress [ 119 ] triggers a number of signalling pathways in various diseases [ 120 ] including AD [ 121 ]. Importantly, neurons die in AD because of erroneous cell cycle control before the pathological hallmarks appear [ 122 ]. Thus, the up regulation of the cell cycle proteins cyclin D1, cyclin E, cyclin A, Cdk2, and E2F transcription factor 1 (E2F-1), along with increased phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma tumour suppressor gene (Rb) protein, results in aberrant cell cycle re-entry and subsequent apoptosis [ 119 ], thereby contributing to AD progression [ 123 ], in which the cells are prone to dedifferentiation and degeneration [ 124 ]. Therefore, therapeutic interventions aimed at ameliorating mitotic changes is expected to have a profound impact on AD progression [ 125 , 126 ]. Recently, an integrative functional genomic analysis was performed to identify pivotal regulators of the cell cycle and their underlying pathways for developing optimal treatment of AD. This study revealed 775 cell cycle genes and 77 trophic factor receptors differentially expressed in AD when compared to controls [ 127 ]. Additionally, a recent combined meta-analysis and co-expression analysis identified 18, 2061 differentially expressed genes and 36 differentially expressed miRNAs, including genes involved in the neuronal cell cycle re-entry, the ubiquitination/proteasome system and mitochondrial homeostasis as well as miRNAs associated with AD pathology. Among them, UBC, ESR1, EGFR, CUL3 and KRAS genes were identified as cell cycle re-entry related factors, thereby suggesting involvement of cellular dyshomeostasis and receptors mediating Aβ toxicity from impaired ubiquitination proteasome system in the cell cycle re-entry occurring in AD [ 128 ]. Hippocampal neurons in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients express proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), cyclin D and cyclin B [ 15 ], and CKIs such as p16 (INK4a), p18 (INK4c) and p27 (KIP1) are expressed in neurons of AD patients [ 129 , 130 ], indicating the integral involvement of the cell cycle machinery in affected neurons. The regulation of cell cycle by different cyclins and CDKs is well counter balanced by their inhibitors, such as p27(Kip1) that has the ability to control the different phases of the cell cycle at the nuclear level. Importantly, alterations in the levels and phosphorylation status of p27(Kip1) have been observed in AD with excessive Aβ 42 production, tau hyper phosphorylation and deregulated insulin signalling leading to an imbalance between the levels and functions of p27(Kip1) in the cytoplasm and nucleus by causing alterations in p27(Kip1) post-transcriptional modifications, which eventually leads to an aberrant cell cycle re-entry [ 131 ]. In this context, inhibition of constitutively active NF-κB via melatonin MT1 receptor can de-repress the p27(Kip1) promoter leading to transcriptional up-regulation of p27(Kip1), which has been demonstrated in cancerous cells [ 132 ], whether a similar interaction of melatonin with p27(Kip1) occurs in neuronal cells certainly deserves further investigation. Moreover, Aβ peptides reactivate the cell cycle machinery of neurons and cause aberrant activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK/ERK) signalling, which promotes the entry of neurons into the cell cycle, ultimately resulting in apoptosis [ 133 ] by elevating the levels of cyclin D1 [ 134 ]. Finally, Cdk4 is activated in the AD brain and its inhibition ameliorates the neurodegenerative process in AD [ 135 ]. 5.2 Melatonin Promotes Cell Cycle Homeostasis Recovery 5.2.1 p75NTR The anti-apoptotic effects of melatonin are mediated by two potential mechanisms: by increasing the activity of pro survival pathways via protein kinase B (Akt) and by the prevention of DNA damage followed by the reduction of cell cycle re-entry [ 136 ]. Cell cycle re-entry in AD may be regulated by microRNA (miR)-26b since the levels of this miR are elevated in relevant pathological areas from the early stages of the disease [ 137 ]. Melatonin has been shown beneficial in alleviating many aspects of AD via regulating some miRs [ 35 ], but its link with miR-26b needs further exploration. The p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) has emerged as a potential target for the regulation of neural plasticity and the promotion of adult neurogenesis in response to injury and neurodegenerative diseases. Thus, it is up regulated under pathological conditions and accounts for controlling numerous processes necessary for nervous system recovery [ 138 ]. As p75NTR is involved in the production of Aβ, neuronal death, neurite degeneration, tau hyper phosphorylation, cell cycle re-entry and cognition decline in AD [ 139 ], it is considered a novel therapeutic target and as a biomarker for AD [ 140 ] and also aids in increasing survival signalling in neurons [ 141 ]. In this context, melatonin alleviates Aβ-induced alterations in tropomyosin receptor kinase A (TrkA) and p75NTR protein levels in SHSY5Y neuroblastoma cell cultures [ 142 , 143 ]. 5.2.2 Cyclins and Cdks Cell cycle markers that are normally found in the nucleus, where they are needed for the expression of key genes that allow the diseased neuron to continue to G1 and, eventually, apoptosis, are elevated in AD neurons [ 121 ]. Moreover, treatment of cells with Aβ peptide was shown to relocate Cdk5, which controls the cell cycle in mature neurons, from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, with a paralleled cell cycle re-entry [ 144 ]. This type of Aβ-induced cell cycle re-entry was shown to immediately precede neuronal cell death in AD [ 145 ]. It has been demonstrated that melatonin attenuates 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1, 2, 3, 6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced neurotoxicity via preventing Cdk5-mediated autophagy in the brains of monkey and mice [ 146 ], which implies an effective regulation of Cdks by this indoleamine. Cdk5 and its neuron-specific activator p35 are required for neurites outgrowth and cortical lamination and the cleavage of p35 to p25 is considered to be one of the reasons for Cdk5 deregulation and hyper activation in AD [ 147 ] as the hyperactivated p25/Cdk5 complex both enhances β-secretase (BACE1) activity via phosphorylation [ 148 ] and hyper phosphorylates tau [ 149 ], thereby disrupting the cytoskeleton and promoting the apoptosis of neurons. Thus, p25/Cdk5 is impacting both amyloid and tau pathologies in AD [ 150 ]. Furthermore, Cdk5 is important for cell cycle arrest of post mitotic neurons [ 144 ], and Aβ 42 alters the localization of Cdk5 and promotes neuronal cell cycle re-entry [ 151 , 152 ]. Moreover, the inhibition of this kinase provides neuroprotection against AD [ 153 ]. Related to this, melatonin has been shown to prevent tau hyper phosphorylation by reducing Cdk5 expression as well as the cleavage of p35 to p25 [ 154 - 156 ]. In addition, there exists a molecular link between melatonin and its effects on the cell cycle [ 157 ] and on cell cycle markers such as cyclin D1, B1, Cdk1 and Cdk4 [ 136 , 157 , 158 ]. Finally, cleavage of p35 to p25 by the calcium-dependent cysteine protease calpain may be involved in the pathogenesis of AD, as suggested by the fact that specific inhibitors of this enzyme effectively inhibit the calcium-induced cleavage of p35 and Aβ-induced cell death [ 159 ]. Importantly, melatonin substantially prevents the activation of calpain and caspase-3 and ameliorates dexamethasone-induced neurotoxicity in human neuroblastoma cells [ 160 ]. The Cdk inhibitor p16INK4a is elevated in AD and is associated with neurofibrillary degeneration [ 129 ], as well as other members of the INK4-family of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors such as p15INK4b, p18INK4c and p19INK4d that bind directly to Cdk4/6 or to complexes of Cdk4/6 with D-type cyclins [ 130 ]. Cdk4 is activated in the AD brain, and its inhibition is considered a therapeutic track for ameliorating neurodegenerative processes in AD [ 142 ]. In this regard, melatonin has been shown to down regulate Cdk4 in osteoblastic cell cultures [ 161 ], implying its regulation over such kinases. Moreover, elevated glucocorticoid levels suppress hippocampal neurogenesis in adults where G1 cell cycle arrest is mediated by an increase of cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21, and melatonin prevents glucocorticoids-mediated toxicity and inhibition of cell proliferation in hippocampal cells of the rat brain [ 162 ]. 5.2.3 DYRK1A/E2F-1/NFATs Dual-specificity tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A (DYRK1A) is a protein kinase with diverse functions in neuronal development and adult brain physiology, and its enhanced levels are associated with the pathology of neurodegenerative diseases like AD [ 163 ]. DYRK1A is implicated in Aβ-mediated tau hyper phosphorylation [ 164 ], and its inhibition has come out as a potential treatment for AD [ 165 ]. This kinase controls cyclin D1 and p21 protein levels, and the p21-cyclin D1 signalling map specifies cell cycle entry and exit decisions [ 166 ]. Of note, Aβ peptides induce a significant increase in DYRK1A mRNA in neuroblastoma cell cultures [ 167 ]. Regarding the mechanisms of action, it is known that the transcription factor targets of retinoblastoma protein (E2F-1) increases DYRK1A mRNA levels by enhancing its promoter activity [ 168 ]. E2F-1 in the AD brain is found primarily in the cytoplasm rather than its normal location in the nucleus, where it normally regulates neuronal cell death induced by DNA damage, thus suggesting that the liberation of E2F-1 from the nucleus exacerbates apoptosis in the AD brain [ 169 ]. Melatonin reverses Fas, E2F-1 and endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis and deregulation of autophagy in mice model [ 170 ]. The nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFATs) is also involved in regulating DYRK1A levels [ 171 , 172 ]. The fact that melatonin mediates its anti-apoptotic effects by increasing the activity of prosurvival pathways by the prevention of DNA damage by regulating E2F-1, followed by the reduction of cell cycle re-entry [ 136 ], along with its involvement in regulating NFATs [ 173 ], gives an insight about how melatonin could possibly regulate the levels of DYRK1A and its functioning. 5.2.4 FoxG1 Related to the possible targeting of cell cycle re-entry as a therapeutic intervention for AD, a very recent investigation has reported involvement of Forkhead Box G1 (FoxG1), a transcription factor which plays an important role in brain development in AD. Using the APP/PS1-Foxg1fl/fl-CreAAV mouse line, it was shown that FoxG1 negatively regulates the levels of p21-activated kinase (PAK3) and likely antagonizes cell cycle re-entry with FoxG1 blocking neuronal apoptosis and Aβ deposition via the alteration of p21cip1-mediated arrest at the G2 stage and the regulation of cyclin A1- and cyclin B-dependent progression of the cell cycle [ 174 ]. This altogether clearly indicates that a pharmacological augmentation of FoxG1 levels could indeed represent a therapeutic track for AD. Although little is known about the interaction between melatonin and FoxG1, developmental studies have shown that FoxG1 mutants exhibit a reduced pineal gland [ 175 ]. Thorough investigations will be required in the future to draw any inference from the aforementioned link. 5.2.5 Mcm/PCNA Aberrant reactivation of cell-cycle mechanisms is also a feature of the aging brain. The mini chromosome maintenance proteins (Mcms) are a eukaryotic family of six distinct protein subtypes (Mcm2-7) that are necessary for DNA replication initiation and progression in the cell cycle [ 176 ]. Mcm2 is a marker for chromosomal replication licensing, which is increased in the hippocampus of elderly brains with AD type pathology along with increased expression of Ki67 and Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) [ 177 ]. Furthermore, phosphorylated Mcm2 is markedly associated with neurofibrillary tangles, neuropil threads, and dystrophic neurites in AD [ 178 ]. Cell cycle events play a major role in the loss of neurons not only in the advanced stages of AD but are also present in MCI individuals, as shown by the fact that PCNA, cyclin D, cyclin B and Cdk4 expressions are increased in the hippocampus and in the basal nucleus of Meynert from MCI individuals similar to that of AD patients [ 20 , 179 ]. Although melatonin, via its receptor activation, down regulates the protein expression of PCNA in rat chondrocytes [ 180 ], delineating its detailed interaction with Mcms needs further exploration. 5.2.6 ATM/p53 Neuronal cell cycle checkpoint proteins, together with the DNA damage response genes Mouse double minute 4 homolog (MDM4), Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ATM- and Rad3-Related (ATR), are strongly up regulated and associated with the progression of dementia. In addition, the downstream target of ATM-p53 signaling, TP53 induced glycolysis regulatory phosphatase (TIGAR), a p53-inducible protein, the activation of which can regulate energy metabolism and protect against oxidative stress, is progressively decreased as the severity of dementia evolved [ 181 ]. Interestingly, melatonin significantly prevents DNA damage via ATM inhibition [ 182 ] and regulates DNA damage response at the transduction, mediation as well as functional levels [ 183 ]. p53, an important factor involved in many areas of cellular physiology and biology, ranging from cellular development and differentiation to cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, along with important functions related to neurodegeneration and synaptic plasticity, is highly elevated in AD [ 184 , 185 ] and induces tau phosphorylation [ 185 ]. Considering that the neuronal cell cycle re-entry coincides with tau hyper phosphorylation and precedes cell death [ 186 ], melatonin, along with preventing the hyper phosphorylation of tau, also protects against apoptosis by regulating p53 levels in rat cerebrum [ 187 ]. 5.2.7 Autophagy/FOXO/Cdk1 Autophagy-related gene expression is regulated by forkhead transcription factor (FOXO)/a NAD-dependent histone deacetylase (SIR2)-mediated aging process, which in turn is associated with the onset of AD [ 188 ]. Given that the regulation of FOXO3a contributes to prevent AD-like amyloid pathology [ 189 ], melatonin increases the expression of SIRT1 and FOXO3a in senescence-accelerated mice [ 190 ] and regulates hippocampal neuronal homeostasis by increasing SIRT1, FOXO1 and melatonin receptors expression in the aging hippocampus [ 191 ]. Cdk1 has been shown to be an apoptotic kinase by inducing the phosphorylation of FOXO1 at the G2/M checkpoint leading to the expression of Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1), a key regulator in bridging the assembly and dynamics of the spindle fibres to regulate cyclin/CDK complexes [ 192 ]. Interestingly, the inhibition of Cdk1 provides neuroprotection through the blockade of aberrant cell cycle progression [ 193 ], while Plk1 activity is elevated in the AD patient brain [ 194 ]. Conversely, inhibition of Plk1 kinase activity or depletion of Plk1 reduces Aβ-induced neuronal cell death [ 195 ]. Directly related to this, melatonin significantly inhibits cell proliferation in a dose-dependent and time-dependent manner, and this inhibition involves the down regulation of cyclin D1, Cdk4, cyclin B1 and Cdk1 [ 158 ] by inhibition of the ERK1/2 signalling [ 196 ]. As a reminder, ERK activity regulates the induction of cyclin D1 [ 197 ], and the Aβ 1-42 peptide causes aberrant activation of MEK/ERK signalling, which promotes the entry of neurons into the cell cycle, thereby resulting in their apoptosis [ 198 ]. 6 IMPLICATIONS OF βAPP AND TAU BIOLOGY IN THE MELATONIN-DEPENDENT STABILIZATION OF THE CELL CYCLE DYNAMIC IN AD Cell cycle-dependent changes can regulate βAPP metabolism and tau hyperphosphorylation, while, in return, tau mutation triggers an abnormal cytoplasmic localization of cell cycle-associated factors [ 199 - 201 ]. Next to this, the inhibition of melatonin biosynthesis not only impairs spatial memory in animal models but also increases tau phosphorylation and activates glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK3β) [ 202 ], while its supplementation attenuates tau hyper phosphorylation [ 203 ]. Last but not least, neuronal cell cycle events also occur in the absence of Aβ deposition and depend upon the amyloidogenic processing of βAPP [ 204 ] as high levels of Aβ peptides induce apoptosis, while they induce cell cycle re-entry in neurons at low levels [ 145 , 198 ]. In this general context, melatonin has been largely established as a protective factor against the amyloid-dependent development of AD [ 88 ] and has been more particularly shown to regulate the non-amyloidogenic and amyloidogenic processing of βAPP under both physiological [ 205 , 206 ] and pathological [ 207 ] conditions, which suggests that a reduction in the physiological level of melatonin might induce these Aβ-dependent changes much before the aggregation occurs. 6.1 Presenilin/p53/p21/Ras The P117R mutation on presenilin 1, the catalytic core of the βAPP-cleaving γ-secretase, increases the levels of p53 and p21, and these changes are rescued by p53 inhibition [ 208 ]. Also, the cancer-associated variant of p21 cip1 may contribute to the loss of cell cycle control in neurons, potentially leading to AD-like neurodegeneration [ 209 ]. In this context, melatonin has been shown to decrease p53 activation via an up regulation of SIRT1 [ 210 ] and to reduce the number of p21-positive cells in the SGZ of the dentate gyrus in adult rats [ 211 ]. Additionally, melatonin treatment also attenuates the expression of p21 and p53 in ligament stem cells [ 212 ]. Ras proteins play an essential role in the transduction of mitogenic signals from activated growth-factor receptors, leading to the cell-cycle entry. The early p21Ras expression pathway is activated during the post-translational modification of βAPP and the phosphorylation of tau, which might also involve PCNA and Ki-67 [ 213 ]. As melatonin functions to inhibit Ras [ 214 ], it can be speculated that this action of melatonin might also be involved in the regulation of cell cycle-mediated processes. Such links clearly indicate an intense association between cell cycle-related proteins and cardinal hallmarks of AD, where melatonin plays a pivotal role. 6.2 APP-BP1/NEDD8 Moreover, the fact that melatonin modulates caspase activity [ 160 ], thereby preventing apoptosis [ 215 , 216 ], suggests that the hormone could lessen the cell cycle re-entry-induced and caspase-dependent apoptosis taking place in AD [ 22 ], while the ability of melatonin to inhibit the ubiquitination-dependent proteasome pathway may provide a promising track in the quest to treat neurodegenerative disorders like AD [ 217 ] when considering that the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is involved in the cell cycle progression and is deregulated in AD [ 218 ]. Moreover, APP-BP1, a βAPP-binding protein, is the regulatory subunit of the activating enzyme for the small ubiquitin-like protein, neural precursor cell expressed developmentally down-regulated protein 8 (NEDD8) [ 219 ], and the interaction of APP-BP1 with βAPP plays a role in cell cycle transit control [ 220 ]. Neddylation is indeed a post-translational modification that controls ubiquitination and the NEDD8 system is essential for the regulation of protein degradation pathways involved in cell cycle progression [ 221 ]. Given that deregulated neddylation has been established as a feature of AD pathogenesis [ 222 ], it has been demonstrated that melatonin pre-treatment prevents the Aβ 42 -induced enhancement of APP-BP1 protein expression and the alteration of NEDD8 cellular localization [ 223 ]. 6.3 Oxidative Stress/BACE1 The high rate of oxidative metabolism and low levels of endogenous antioxidant enzymes in the brain marks the susceptibility and sensitivity of neurons towards ROS/reactive nitrogen species (RNS) levels, and oxidative stress may cause DNA damage affecting the cell cycle progression and altering the genomic integrity as it stimulates quiescent neurons to leave the G0 phase and re-enter the cell cycle [ 224 ]. Re-entry into the cell cycle in terminally differentiated neurons influences cell senescence and further contributes to oxidative stress and deregulated apoptosis [ 225 ], which is a prevalent feature in AD [ 226 ]. Likewise, under conditions of increased oxidative toxicity, AD neurons possess genetic defects allowing them to enter and stay in the G1 phase of the cell cycle instead of proceeding towards apoptosis. Moreover, even a mild form of oxidative stress promotes the amyloidogenic processing of βAPP by redistributing BACE1 [ 227 ] and increasing its protein levels [ 228 ]. Interestingly, the neurofibrillary tangle-bearing neurons overexpress more than two hundred genes involved in oxidative stress [ 229 ]. Age-associated decrease in melatonin levels [ 44 ] and its parallel decrement with AD progression [ 230 ] makes the brain more vulnerable to oxidative damage-induced cell cycle homeostasis disruption. Relatively, melatonin enhances the expression of a number of antioxidant enzymes that are reduced in AD [ 231 ], not only in the brain but also in various other organs [ 232 ]. In addition, melatonin-induced reduction in tangle formation would also be beneficial in preventing the instigation of overexpression of genes pertaining to oxidative stress [ 210 ]. Neurons are vulnerable to ROS-induced DNA damage that correlates with cell cycle arrest [ 233 ], and melatonin significantly attenuates DNA damage in many experimental models [ 234 ]. Silent information regulator 2 (SIR2) activity is dependent on its cofactor nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) and decreases in NAD+ levels occurring due to the disruption of metabolic processes, would limit SIR2 activity and trigger cell cycle re-entry [ 235 ]. Also, NAD+ has been shown to be beneficial in AD by regulating BACE1 levels and reducing Aβ toxicity [ 236 ]. Related to this, melatonin is a potent free radical scavenger [ 237 ] and acts as an effective antioxidant [ 238 ] to preserve NAD+ levels under oxidative stress [ 239 ], which suggests that melatonin prevents oxidative stress-induced aberrations in cell cycle events not only because of its intrinsic antioxidant properties but also by boosting the endogenous levels of brain antioxidant enzymes [ 240 ]. Table 1 summarizes the beneficial effects of melatonin on cell cycle-related factors. 7 ROLE OF MELATONIN IN REGULATING THE CELL CYCLE DURING NEUROGENESIS Cell cycle kinetics modulates neurogenesis, and it is the cell cycle length that plays an alleged role in defective neurogenesis [ 241 ]. The cell cycle machinery is involved in the regulation of quiescence and expansion of stem cells and in the differentiation of neural progenitors in the adult neurogenic niches [ 242 - 244 ], along with the regulation of histogenesis, neuronal differentiation and maintenance of stem cells [ 112 ]. The cell cycle regulators directly influence mechanisms that control the cell fate and differentiation in the developing nervous system, thereby playing important roles in controlling cell cycle progression and neurogenesis [ 245 ]. Adult neural stem cells (NSCs) are heterogeneous [ 246 ] and can be affected by differences in cell signalling [ 247 ], and changes in cell cycle parameters and re-entry of adult neural or stem cells reflect cell cycle variation in pathological versus physiological conditions [ 248 ]. Thus, the complex balance between neurogenerative and neurodegenerative processes functions relies on the fine-tuning of programmed cell death, which goes awry in neurodegeneration and leads to untimely and unnecessary loss of neurons. The regulation of cell cycle entry and exit is crucial for developing neurons, and the transcription factors paired box (Pax) and SRY (sex determining region Y) box (SOX) family of proteins regulate and crosstalk with cell cycle regulatory proteins [ 249 ]. Importantly, melatonin has been shown to increase Sox2 expression [ 250 , 251 ], thereby supposedly preventing abnormal cell cycle re-entry and maintenance of stemness (Fig. 1 ). Interestingly, homeobox genes, that are required for normal development of the rodent pineal gland, include Pax6 [ 252 ], which expression is concomitant with the ontogenetic onset of melatonin synthesis [ 253 ]. Beta-catenin signaling is an important modulator of both cell cycle mechanics and apoptosis [ 254 ] and interruption of this signaling may contribute to the impairment of progenitor cells' neurogenesis in AD [ 255 ]. Melatonin activates β-catenin signaling and protects neurons against prion protein-induced neurotoxicity [ 256 ], and where cell cycle regulatory proteins may affect the proliferative activity of NPCs across the lifespan, which affects the rate of cell division [ 257 ], melatonin treatment prevents the alteration of several markers involved in cell cycle progression and synaptogenesis in NSCs derived from the adult rat hippocampus [ 258 ]. The age-related decline in neurogenesis has been attributed to a decreased pool of NPCs because aging cells divide less at a given period, and the ones which do are more likely to re-enter the cell cycle within a day, both in vitro and in vivo [ 259 ]. Although mesenchymal stem cells represent an attractive source for stem cell-based regenerative therapy [ 260 ], they are vulnerable to oxidative stress-induced premature senescence under pathological conditions. In this context, melatonin interestingly protects these cells from premature senescence via the SIRT1-dependent pathway by improving cell proliferation, decreasing senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity, and improving entry of proliferating cells into the S phase by attenuating the phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), decreasing the expression of the senescence-associated protein p16 (INK) (4α), and increasing SIRT1 [ 261 ]. G protein-coupled receptors are additional key regulators of cellular communication that can regulate the expression, activity, localization and stability of cell cycle regulatory proteins that either promote or inhibit the initiation of DNA synthesis. These receptors regulate cellular proliferation, specifically the progression from the G1 phase to the S phase of the cell cycle [ 262 ]. Both MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors are G protein-coupled receptors that, apart from regulating a plethora of physiological processes, also regulate cell proliferation [ 263 ] as well as neurogenesis under pathophysiological conditions [ 37 ]. Moreover, different proteins associated with the cell cycle, including cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases and proto-oncogenes such as c-Myc, are increased in degenerating neurons. The proto-oncogene Myc induces neurons to re-enter the cell cycle [ 264 ], which is pathophysiologically relevant to AD and other neurodegenerative diseases. Thus, such cell cycle re-entry in primary neurons leads to tau phosphorylation and conformational changes, as observed in AD [ 26 ], as well as neuronal cell death, gliosis and cognitive deficits. In direct connexion with these events, while melatonin drives the circadian amplitudes of proliferation genes like c-Myc [ 265 , 266 ], it also reduces c-Myc expression [ 267 ] to potentially prevent AD-associated excessive cell cycle re-entry. From a mechanistic point of view, c-Myc levels are positively controlled by ERK, which phosphorylates and stabilizes c-Myc and thus allows it to act on growth and transformation genes promoters [ 268 ], with aberrant activation of MEK/ERK signalling, promoting the entry of neurons into the cell cycle and their apoptosis [ 134 ]. Because melatonin down regulates ERK [ 63 ], a clear inference can be drawn that melatonin, directly or via the ERK signalling pathways, regulates c-Myc, which in turn could possibly be beneficial in preventing c-Myc-induced excessive cell cycle re-entry observed in AD. Another key actor of neurogenesis is the Ki-67 transcription factor that is expressed in proliferating progenitors in S, G 2 , M, and parts of G 1 phases of the cell cycle [ 269 ], and that is associated with AD-related cytoskeletal pathology [ 270 ]. Interestingly, melatonin significantly restores Ki67-positive proliferating cells in the dentate gyrus of the D-galactose-induced mouse model via an increase in cyclic AMP response element binding (pCREB) expression [ 271 ], which is suggestive of the fact that melatonin may be helpful in reducing age-related phenomena in the brain. In addition, melatonin-induced ERK activation regulates c-Myc protein stability and plays a principal role in controlling cell cycle progression and apoptosis [ 272 ]. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) stands as another important neurogenesis-promoting factor having an impact on the cell cycle by positively controlling the expression of cyclin D1 and cyclin E [ 273 , 274 ]. Given that melatonin has been described as being able, alone [ 275 , 276 ] or in combination with exercise [ 277 ], to induce an increase in BDNF brain levels in animals, one can suppose that melatonin acts in a stimulating way on neurogenesis partially via its ability to raise BDNF levels and thus promote NSCs proliferation. However, the lack of evidence for a stimulatory effect of melatonin on serum BDNF levels in humans invites caution regarding this hypothesis [ 278 ]. Table 2 presents a digest of the beneficial effects of melatonin on neurogenic factors. Finally, because melatonin is a powerful chronobiotic able to potently regulate the sleep/wake cycle [ 54 ], one should consider its possible differential impact on neurogenesis during rapid eye movement (REM) and non REM sleep in an AD context. Indeed, REM sleep-associated processes facilitate the proliferation of granule cells in the adult hippocampal and its deprivation has been shown to reduce neurogenesis in the hippocampal dentate gyrus of the adult rat [ 279 ]. Recently, it has been demonstrated that REM sleep deprivation alters learning-induced cell proliferation and the generation of newborn young neurons in the dentate gyrus of the dorsal hippocampus [ 280 ]. In this context, a differential involvement of the melatonin receptors MT1 and MT2 in the regulation of REM and non-REM sleep is envisioned since MT 2 receptors are located in the reticular thalamus (non-REM area), while MT 1 receptors mostly reside in the locus coeruleus and the lateral hypothalamus (REM areas) [ 281 ]. Moreover, animal studies have also shown that a prophylactic administration of oral melatonin for two weeks in REM sleep-deprived mice increases the proliferation of neural progenitors and the levels of antiapoptotic proteins in the hippocampus [ 282 ]. Recent studies have suggested that clock-timed melatonin treatment can reduce the development of Parkinsonism and alleviate REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD). Firstly, an observational cohort study demonstrated that low-dose, long-term and timely clocked melatonin treatment in RBD patients effectively improves RBD symptoms [ 283 , 284 ]. Secondly, considering that RBD patients tend to develop α-synucleinopathy within a decade of RBD onset, daily bedtime administration of melatonin has been effective in reducing RDB, which further might halt PD-leading neurodegeneration [ 285 ]. However, when considering AD, there is to date no solid proof that RDB is directly linked to an increased probability of developing the disease, and a fortiori no data evidencing a beneficial effect of melatonin on the pathology via its action on REM [ 286 ]. Nevertheless, the supposed ability of melatonin to increase human adult neurogenesis via its ability to reduce sleep disorders is based on several observations. Firstly, it has been established that disruption in sleep for more than twenty-four hours substantially inhibits cell proliferation and decreases cell survival suggesting that sleep has a crucial role in regulating neurogenesis with subsequent effects on learning and memory [ 287 , 288 ]. Secondly, REM sleep deprivation reduces hippocampal neurogenesis [ 279 , 289 ] and hippocampal volume with significant alterations in neuronal plasticity and cognitive functions [ 290 ]. Thirdly, sleep reduces DNA damage and positively modulates chromosome dynamics [ 291 ]. In this context, DNA damage is associated with aging and age-related neurodegenerative disorders by significantly affecting neuronal plasticity [ 292 ], and melatonin is well known for its protective function against DNA damage [ 293 ] by increasing the DNA repair capacity [ 294 ]. One important question is whether melatonin can convey prophylactic effects against AD via its beneficial action on sleep. One of the elements of the answer could lie in the fact that circadian fluctuations of Aβ concentrations in the interstitial brain fluid and in the cerebrovascular fluid are thoroughly affected by sleep disorders by influencing the glymphatic brain system and Aβ production [ 295 ]. Considering that pineal melatonin is released directly into the CSF, its functional regulatory role in the neural glymphatic network and its physiological and therapeutic significance for neurocognitive health are well supported by experimental evidence indicating that melatonin is involved in clearing pathogenic toxins, like Aβ, from the brain to protect against neurocognitive decline [ 296 ]. Apart from other regions, sleep quality significantly also affects Aβ accumulation in the precuneus area of the brain, while sleep disturbance in AD is associated with a reduction of the volume of the precuneus that is functionally involved in memory [ 297 ]. Considering the importance of this brain area in AD, it is interesting to note that melatonin controls the activation of the precuneus [ 298 ]. Along the same lines, a cross-sectional study of healthy and cognitively unimpaired participants revealed a significant decrease in Aβ levels by increasing the night time sleep by just one hour [ 299 ], which suggests that a longer duration of sleep throughout life could reduce the risk of developing AD. Another PET imaging analysis combined with sleep polysomnography of clinically normal older adults stated that measuring sleep efficiency could predict the progression of Aβ deposition prior to the onset of cognitive symptomology in AD [ 300 ]. As a whole, considering that sleep has important roles in learning and memory consolidation and that its deprivation has a significant impact on the symptoms and progression of AD [ 301 ] and that melatonin augments total sleep time and decreases sleep onset latency, thus improving the overall quality of sleep [ 302 ], it seems reasonable to assume that this hormone may, via its sleep-enhancing activity, act as a prophylactic against AD. Finally, beyond its effects on hippocampal neurogenesis, it is important to also consider the impact of melatonin on synaptogenesis. Indeed, this hormone has been shown to prevent the reduction in synaptogenic processes during the cerebellar development of chick embryos under excitotoxic neuronal degenerative conditions [ 303 ]. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that melatonin exposure in high-fat diet fed rats prevents the reduction in synaptogenesis [ 304 ] and that maternal melatonin exposure has been shown to restore the delayed synaptogenesis in a rat model of intrauterine cortical dysplasia [ 305 ]. In addition, it has been revealed that melatonin supplementation improvised synaptogenesis in the olfactory bulbectomized rat [ 306 ] that has been proposed as an animal model of depression. Mechanistically, it has been evidenced that high intracellular cAMP levels tone down neuritogenesis and synaptogenesis during vertebrate neurodevelopment and that melatonin plays a significant role in downregulating cAMP levels [ 307 ]. As a whole, recent research has consistently supported the notion that melatonin contributes to neuronal survival, proliferation, and differentiation, such as dendritogenesis and axogenesis [ 308 ]. 8 THE CONFRONTATION BETWEEN MELATONIN AND BENZODIAZEPINES WITH REGARD TO THE THERAPEUTIC TREATMENT AIMED AT CORRECTING THE DEFECTS OF THE CIRCADIAN RHYTHM Although benzodiazepines (BZDs) are psychoactive drugs usually prescribed for circadian misalignment and insomnia, these medications produce side effects and significantly decrease memory function [ 309 ]. Furthermore, long-term use of BZDs is associated with an increased risk of cognitive impairment and dementia [ 310 ]. In addition, BZDs affect neurogenesis via GABA receptors and have been shown to cause neuronal apoptosis in the developing rodent brain [ 311 ]. Indeed, these drugs have complex effects on mitotic cells, which closely depend on the duration of exposure since long-term exposure reduces overall neurogenesis while short-term treatment increases proliferation [ 312 ]. Moreover, high concentrations of BZDs lead to the inhibition of DNA synthesis [ 313 ]. That melatonin can both enhance DNA repair capacity by regulating several key genes involved in DNA damage responsive pathways [ 294 ] and convey antiproliferative effects through a reduction of DNA synthesis [ 314 ] clearly illustrates the low versus high dosage response under different pathological conditions. This might be the case with BZDs also, but the side effects and toxicity of BZDs can probably lead to morbidity and mortality for some patients where the elderly are especially prone to toxicity [ 315 ], which is certainly not the case with melatonin administration, which is well acknowledged for least observed side and toxic effects. In this context, several studies have suggested that melatonin might be more suitable and effective than BZDs in the management of circadian misalignment and sleep disorders because melatonin improves sleep without significant performance impairment [ 316 - 318 ] and enhances neurogenesis and modulates the cell cycle machinery without toxic effects. CONCLUSION AD treatment and associated therapeutic interventions could be effective, but the lack of timely diagnosis impacts the overall prognosis and cost-effectiveness. It has been well documented that fluctuations in the circadian rhythms and cell cycle alterations are parts of early neurodegenerative processes, which likely correspond to diminished melatonin levels, thus further enhancing the ability of early diagnosis. Intriguingly, circadian and cell cycle-oriented interventions have been proposed as treatments for neurological disorders like AD. Melatonin not only regulates the circadian rhythm alterations but also prevents disrupted cell cycle-mediated variations and enhances adult neurogenesis (Fig. 2 ). The insights provided in the present review would certainly aid in our understanding of the importance of optimizing the timing of AD-dementia diagnosis, which would potentially improve the prospects for melatonin intervention. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS BV is supported by Mahidol University (grant NDFR-13/2564). AUTHOR’S CONTRIBUTIONS MS wrote the original draft of the manuscript; MS and BV contributed to improving, updating and revising the manuscript. LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AD Alzheimer’s Disease Cdks Cyclin-dependent Kinases CKIs Cyclin-dependent Kinase Inhibitors CNS Central Nervous System HD Huntington's Disease MCI Mild Cognitive Impairment NSCs Neural Stem Cells PD Parkinson’s Disease RNS Reactive Nitrogen Species ROS Reactive Oxygen Species SCN Suprachiasmatic Nucleus SGZ Sub Granular Zone UPS Ubiquitin-proteasome System CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION Not applicable. FUNDING None. CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no conflict of interest, financial or otherwise. REFERENCES 1 Duffy J.F. Zitting K.M. Chinoy E.D. Aging and circadian rhythms. Sleep Med. Clin. 2015 10 4 423 434 10.1016/j.jsmc.2015.08.002 26568120 PMC4648699 2 Hood S. Amir S. Neurodegeneration and the circadian clock. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2017 9 170 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00170 28611660 PMC5447688 3 Nassan M. Videnovic A. Circadian rhythms in neurodegenerative disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2022 18 1 7 24 10.1038/s41582-021-00577-7 34759373 4 Peng X. Fan R. Xie L. Shi X. Dong K. Zhang S. Tao J. Xu W. Ma D. Chen J. Yang Y. A growing link between circadian rhythms, type 2 diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 23 1 504 10.3390/ijms23010504 35008933 PMC8745289 5 Thome J. Coogan A.N. Woods A.G. Darie C.C. Häßler F. CLOCK genes and circadian rhythmicity in Alzheimer disease. J. Aging Res. 2011 2011 1 4 10.4061/2011/383091 22028968 PMC3199059 6 Griffin P. Dimitry J.M. Sheehan P.W. Lananna B.V. Guo C. Robinette M.L. Hayes M.E. Cedeño M.R. Nadarajah C.J. Ezerskiy L.A. Colonna M. Zhang J. Bauer A.Q. Burris T.P. Musiek E.S. Circadian clock protein Rev-erbα regulates neuroinflammation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2019 116 11 5102 5107 10.1073/pnas.1812405116 30792350 PMC6421453 7 Bering T. Carstensen M.B. Wörtwein G. Weikop P. Rath M.F. The circadian oscillator of the cerebral cortex: Molecular, biochemical and behavioural effects of deleting the Arntl clock gene in cortical neurons. Cereb. Cortex 2017 28 2 644 657 10.1093/cercor/bhw406 28052921 8 Gallego M. Virshup D.M. Post-translational modifications regulate the ticking of the circadian clock. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2007 8 2 139 148 10.1038/nrm2106 17245414 9 Lee C. Etchegaray J.P. Cagampang F.R.A. Loudon A.S.I. Reppert S.M. Posttranslational mechanisms regulate the mammalian circadian clock. Cell 2001 107 7 855 867 10.1016/S0092-8674(01)00610-9 11779462 10 Videnovic A. Lazar A.S. Barker R.A. Overeem S. ‘The clocks that time us’—circadian rhythms in neurodegenerative disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2014 10 12 683 693 10.1038/nrneurol.2014.206 25385339 PMC4344830 11 Hunt J. Coulson E.J. Rajnarayanan R. Oster H. Videnovic A. Rawashdeh O. Sleep and circadian rhythms in Parkinson’s disease and preclinical models. Mol. Neurodegener. 2022 17 1 2 10.1186/s13024-021-00504-w 35000606 PMC8744293 12 Hastings M.H. Goedert M. Circadian clocks and neurodegenerative diseases: time to aggregate? Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2013 23 5 880 887 10.1016/j.conb.2013.05.004 23797088 PMC3782660 13 Verma A.K. Singh S. Rizvi S.I. Aging, circadian disruption and neurodegeneration: Interesting interplay. Exp. Gerontol. 2022 172 112076 10.1016/j.exger.2022.112076 36574855 14 Colwell C.S. Defining circadian disruption in neurodegenerative disorders. J. Clin. Invest. 2021 131 19 e148288 10.1172/JCI148288 34596047 PMC8483739 15 Leng Y. Musiek E.S. Hu K. Cappuccio F.P. Yaffe K. Association between circadian rhythms and neurodegenerative diseases. Lancet Neurol. 2019 18 3 307 318 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30461-7 30784558 PMC6426656 16 Wang X.L. Li L. Circadian clock regulates inflammation and the development of neurodegeneration. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2021 11 696554 10.3389/fcimb.2021.696554 34595127 PMC8476957 17 Moreno-Jiménez E.P. Flor-García M. Terreros-Roncal J. Rábano A. Cafini F. Pallas-Bazarra N. Ávila J. Llorens-Martín M. Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is abundant in neurologically healthy subjects and drops sharply in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Med. 2019 25 4 554 560 10.1038/s41591-019-0375-9 30911133 18 Ali A.A.H. von Gall C. Adult neurogenesis under control of the circadian system. Cells 2022 11 5 764 10.3390/cells11050764 35269386 PMC8909047 19 Graña X. Reddy E.P. Cell cycle control in mammalian cells: role of cyclins, cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs), growth suppressor genes and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKIs). Oncogene 1995 11 2 211 219 7624138 20 Hoozemans J.J.M. Brückner M.K. Rozemuller A.J.M. Veerhuis R. Eikelenboom P. Arendt T. Cyclin D1 and cyclin E are co-localized with cyclo-oxygenase 2 (COX-2) in pyramidal neurons in Alzheimer disease temporal cortex. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 2002 61 8 678 688 10.1093/jnen/61.8.678 12152783 21 Yang Y. Mufson E.J. Herrup K. Neuronal cell death is preceded by cell cycle events at all stages of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 2003 23 7 2557 2563 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-07-02557.2003 12684440 PMC6742098 22 Bonda D.J. Lee H. Kudo W. Zhu X. Smith M.A. Lee H. Pathological implications of cell cycle re-entry in Alzheimer disease. Expert Rev. Mol. Med. 2010 12 e19 10.1017/S146239941000150X 20584423 PMC2922901 23 Barrett T. Stangis K.A. Saito T. Saido T. Park K.H.J. Neuronal cell cycle re-entry enhances neuropathological features in AppNLF knock-in mice. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2021 82 4 1683 1702 10.3233/JAD-210091 34219712 PMC8461670 24 Wang W. Bu B. Xie M. Zhang M. Yu Z. Tao D. Neural cell cycle dysregulation and central nervous system diseases. Prog. Neurobiol. 2009 89 1 1 17 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2009.01.007 19619927 25 Di Giovanni S. Movsesyan V. Ahmed F. Cernak I. Schinelli S. Stoica B. Faden A.I. Cell cycle inhibition provides neuroprotection and reduces glial proliferation and scar formation after traumatic brain injury. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2005 102 23 8333 8338 10.1073/pnas.0500989102 15923260 PMC1149422 26 Byrnes K.R. Faden A.I. Role of cell cycle proteins in CNS injury. Neurochem. Res. 2007 32 10 1799 1807 10.1007/s11064-007-9312-2 17404835 27 Dehay C. Kennedy H. Cell-cycle control and cortical development. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2007 8 6 438 450 10.1038/nrn2097 17514197 28 Frade J.M. Ovejero-Benito M.C. Neuronal cell cycle: the neuron itself and its circumstances. Cell Cycle 2015 14 5 712 720 10.1080/15384101.2015.1004937 25590687 PMC4418291 29 Arendt T. Brückner M.K. Mosch B. Lösche A. Selective cell death of hyperploid neurons in Alzheimer’s disease. Am. J. Pathol. 2010 177 1 15 20 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090955 20472889 PMC2893646 30 Frade J.M. López-Sánchez N. A novel hypothesis for Alzheimer disease based on neuronal tetraploidy induced by p75 NTR. Cell Cycle 2010 9 10 1934 1941 10.4161/cc.9.10.11582 20436277 31 McShea A. Lee H. Petersen R.B. Casadesus G. Vincent I. Linford N.J. Funk J.O. Shapiro R.A. Smith M.A. Neuronal cell cycle re-entry mediates Alzheimer disease-type changes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 2007 1772 4 467 472 10.1016/j.bbadis.2006.09.010 17095196 32 Moh C. Kubiak J.Z. Bajic V.P. Zhu X. Smith M.A. Lee H. Cell cycle deregulation in the neurons of Alzheimer’s disease. Results Probl. Cell Differ. 2011 53 565 576 10.1007/978-3-642-19065-0_23 21630160 PMC5925746 33 Currais A. Hortobágyi T. Soriano S. The neuronal cell cycle as a mechanism of pathogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease. Aging (Albany NY) 2009 1 4 363 371 10.18632/aging.100045 20157524 PMC2806021 34 Reiter R.J. The melatonin rhythm: both a clock and a calendar. Experientia 1993 49 8 654 664 10.1007/BF01923947 8395408 35 Hiragaki S. Baba K. Coulson E. Kunst S. Spessert R. Tosini G. Melatonin signaling modulates clock genes expression in the mouse retina. PLoS One 2014 9 9 e106819 10.1371/journal.pone.0106819 25203735 PMC4159264 36 Vriend J. Reiter R.J. Melatonin feedback on clock genes: a theory involving the proteasome. J. Pineal Res. 2015 58 1 1 11 10.1111/jpi.12189 25369242 37 Oishi A. Gbahou F. Jockers R. Melatonin receptors, brain functions, and therapies. Handb. Clin. Neurol. 2021 179 345 356 10.1016/B978-0-12-819975-6.00022-4 34225974 38 Hossain M.F. Wang N. Chen R. Li S. Roy J. Uddin M.G. Li Z. Lim L.W. Song Y.Q. Exploring the multifunctional role of melatonin in regulating autophagy and sleep to mitigate Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology. Ageing Res. Rev. 2021 67 101304 10.1016/j.arr.2021.101304 33610813 39 Vecchierini M.F. Kilic-Huck U. Quera-Salva M.A. Melatonin (MEL) and its use in neurological diseases and insomnia: Recommendations of the French Medical and Research Sleep Society (SFRMS). Rev. Neurol. (Paris) 2021 177 3 245 259 10.1016/j.neurol.2020.06.009 32921425 40 Shukla M. Govitrapong P. Boontem P. Reiter R.J. Satayavivad J. Mechanisms of melatonin in alleviating Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 2017 15 7 1010 1031 10.2174/1570159X15666170313123454 28294066 PMC5652010 41 Shukla M. Chinchalongporn V. Govitrapong P. Reiter R.J. The role of melatonin in targeting cell signaling pathways in neurodegeneration. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2019 1443 1 75 96 10.1111/nyas.14005 30756405 42 Shukla M. Sotthibundhu A. Govitrapong P. Role of melatonin in regulating neurogenesis: Implications for the neurodegenerative pathology and analogous therapeutics for Alzheimer’s disease. Melatonin Res. 2020 3 2 216 242 10.32794/mr11250059 43 Uddin M.S. Sumsuzzman D.M. Jeandet P. Behl T. Rauf A. Amran M.S. Ashraf G.M. Deciphering the interacting mechanisms of circadian disruption and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurochem. Res. 2021 46 7 1603 1617 10.1007/s11064-021-03325-x 33871799 44 Karasek M. Melatonin, human aging, and age-related diseases. Exp. Gerontol. 2004 39 11-12 1723 1729 10.1016/j.exger.2004.04.012 15582288 45 Ramos E. Romero A. Morales-García J.Á. Melatonin: a multitasking indoleamine to modulate hippocampal neurogenesis. Neural Regen. Res. 2023 18 3 503 505 10.4103/1673-5374.350189 36018154 PMC9727438 46 Zawilska J.B. Skene D.J. Arendt J. Physiology and pharmacology of melatonin in relation to biological rhythms. Pharmacol. Rep. 2009 61 3 383 410 10.1016/S1734-1140(09)70081-7 19605939 47 Hardeland R. Melatonin and the theories of aging: a critical appraisal of melatonin’s role in antiaging mechanisms. J. Pineal Res. 2013 55 4 325 356 10.1111/jpi.12090 24112071 48 Biggio G. Biggio F. Talani G. Mostallino M.C. Aguglia A. Aguglia E. Palagini L. Melatonin: From neurobiology to treatment. Brain Sci. 2021 11 9 1121 10.3390/brainsci11091121 34573143 PMC8468230 49 Bubenik G.A. Konturek S.J. Melatonin and aging: prospects for human treatment. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 2011 62 1 13 19 21451205 50 Martín Giménez V.M. de las Heras N. Lahera V. Tresguerres J.A.F. Reiter R.J. Manucha W. Melatonin as an anti-aging therapy for age-related cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2022 14 888292 10.3389/fnagi.2022.888292 35721030 PMC9204094 51 Tordjman S. Chokron S. Delorme R. Charrier A. Bellissant E. Jaafari N. Fougerou C. Melatonin: Pharmacology, functions and therapeutic benefits. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 2017 15 3 434 443 10.2174/1570159X14666161228122115 28503116 PMC5405617 52 Wurtman R.J. Age-related decreases in melatonin secretion-clinical consequences. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2000 85 6 2135 2136 10.1210/jcem.85.6.6660 10852441 53 Onaolapo O.J. Onaolapo A.Y. Melatonin, adolescence, and the brain: An insight into the period-specific influences of a multifunctional signaling molecule. Birth Defects Res. 2017 109 20 1659 1671 10.1002/bdr2.1171 29251845 54 Cruz-Sanabria F. Carmassi C. Bruno S. Bazzani A. Carli M. Scarselli M. Faraguna U. Melatonin as a chronobiotic with sleep-promoting properties. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 2022 20 Online ahead of print 10.2174/1570159X20666220217152617 35176989 PMC10227911 55 Anghel L. Baroiu L. Popazu C. Pătraș D. Fotea S. Nechifor A. Ciubara A. Nechita L. Mușat C. Stefanopol I. Tatu A. Ciubara A. Benefits and adverse events of melatonin use in the elderly (Review). Exp. Ther. Med. 2022 23 3 219 10.3892/etm.2022.11142 35126722 PMC8796282 56 Nous A. Engelborghs S. Smolders I. Melatonin levels in the Alzheimer’s disease continuum: a systematic review. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 2021 13 1 52 10.1186/s13195-021-00788-6 33622399 PMC7903801 57 Cardinali D.P. Melatonin: Clinical perspectives in neurodegeneration. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne) 2019 10 480 10.3389/fendo.2019.00480 31379746 PMC6646522 58 Cardinali D. Vigo D. Olivar N. Vidal M. Brusco L. Melatonin therapy in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Antioxidants 2014 3 2 245 277 10.3390/antiox3020245 26784870 PMC4665493 59 Wang Y.Y. Zheng W. Ng C.H. Ungvari G.S. Wei W. Xiang Y.T. Meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of melatonin in Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 2017 32 1 50 57 10.1002/gps.4571 27645169 60 Chen D. Zhang T. Lee T.H. Cellular mechanisms of melatonin: Insight from neurodegenerative diseases. Biomolecules 2020 10 8 1158 10.3390/biom10081158 32784556 PMC7464852 61 Vaccaro A. Kaplan Dor Y. Nambara K. Pollina E.A. Lin C. Greenberg M.E. Rogulja D. Sleep loss can cause death through accumulation of reactive oxygen species in the gut. Cell 2020 181 6 1307 1328.e15 10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.049 32502393 62 Ramírez-Rodríguez G. Klempin F. Babu H. Benítez-King G. Kempermann G. Melatonin modulates cell survival of new neurons in the hippocampus of adult mice. Neuropsychopharmacology 2009 34 9 2180 2191 10.1038/npp.2009.46 19421166 63 Leung J.W.H. Cheung K.K. Ngai S.P.C. Tsang H.W.H. Lau B.W.M. Protective effects of melatonin on neurogenesis impairment in neurological disorders and its relevant molecular mechanisms. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 21 16 5645 10.3390/ijms21165645 32781737 PMC7460604 64 Sumsuzzman D.M. Choi J. Jin Y. Hong Y. Neurocognitive effects of melatonin treatment in healthy adults and individuals with Alzheimer’s disease and insomnia: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2021 127 459 473 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.04.034 33957167 65 Roy J. Wong K.Y. Aquili L. Uddin M.S. Heng B.C. Tipoe G.L. Wong K.H. Fung M.L. Lim L.W. Role of melatonin in Alzheimer’s disease: From preclinical studies to novel melatonin-based therapies. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 2022 65 100986 10.1016/j.yfrne.2022.100986 35167824 66 Mendoza J. Challet E. Brain clocks: from the suprachiasmatic nuclei to a cerebral network. Neuroscientist 2009 15 5 477 488 10.1177/1073858408327808 19224887 67 Homolak J. Mudrovčić M. Vukić B. Toljan K. Circadian rhythm and Alzheimer’s disease. Med. Sci. (Basel) 2018 6 3 52 10.3390/medsci6030052 29933646 PMC6164904 68 Halberg F. Zander H.A. Houglum M.W. Mühlemann H.R. Daily variations in tissue mitoses, blood eosinophils and rectal temperatures of rats. Am. J. Physiol. 1954 177 3 361 366 10.1152/ajplegacy.1954.177.3.361 13158575 69 Dekens M.P.S. Santoriello C. Vallone D. Grassi G. Whitmore D. Foulkes N.S. Light regulates the cell cycle in zebrafish. Curr. Biol. 2003 13 23 2051 2057 10.1016/j.cub.2003.10.022 14653994 70 Masri S. Cervantes M. Sassone-Corsi P. The circadian clock and cell cycle: interconnected biological circuits. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 2013 25 6 730 734 10.1016/j.ceb.2013.07.013 23969329 PMC4573394 71 Ye R. Selby C.P. Chiou Y.Y. Ozkan-Dagliyan I. Gaddameedhi S. Sancar A. Dual modes of CLOCK:BMAL1 inhibition mediated by Cryptochrome and Period proteins in the mammalian circadian clock. Genes Dev. 2014 28 18 1989 1998 10.1101/gad.249417.114 25228643 PMC4173159 72 Rakshit K. Krishnan N. Guzik E.M. Pyza E. Giebultowicz J.M. Effects of aging on the molecular circadian oscillations in Drosophila. Chronobiol. Int. 2012 29 1 5 14 10.3109/07420528.2011.635237 22217096 PMC3265550 73 Blacher E. Tsai C. Litichevskiy L. Shipony Z. Iweka C.A. Schneider K.M. Chuluun B. Heller H.C. Menon V. Thaiss C.A. Andreasson K.I. Aging disrupts circadian gene regulation and function in macrophages. Nat. Immunol. 2022 23 2 229 236 10.1038/s41590-021-01083-0 34949832 PMC9704320 74 Yang L. Liu X. Song L. Su G. Di A. Bai C. Wei Z. Li G. Melatonin restores the pluripotency of long-term-cultured embryonic stem cells through melatonin receptor-dependent m6A RNA regulation. J. Pineal Res. 2020 69 2 e12669 10.1111/jpi.12669 32415999 75 Torres-Farfan C. Rocco V. Monsó C. Valenzuela F.J. Campino C. Germain A. Torrealba F. Valenzuela G.J. Seron-Ferre M. Maternal melatonin effects on clock gene expression in a nonhuman primate fetus. Endocrinology 2006 147 10 4618 4626 10.1210/en.2006-0628 16840546 76 Li X. Guan J. Sun T. Yang J. Yu H. Yao J. Wang Z. Circadian learning and memory changes in Aβ1–42 induced Alzheimer’s mice. Metab. Brain Dis. 2020 35 3 463 471 10.1007/s11011-019-00509-x 31728887 77 Lee J. Kim D.E. Griffin P. Sheehan P.W. Kim D.H. Musiek E.S. Yoon S.Y. Inhibition of REV-ERBs stimulates microglial amyloid-beta clearance and reduces amyloid plaque deposition in the 5XFAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Aging Cell 2020 19 2 e13078 10.1111/acel.13078 31800167 PMC6996949 78 González-Fernández B. Sánchez D.I. Crespo I. San-Miguel B. de Urbina J.O. González-Gallego J. Tuñón M.J. Melatonin attenuates dysregulation of the circadian clock pathway in mice with CCl4-induced fibrosis and human hepatic stellate cells. Front. Pharmacol. 2018 9 556 10.3389/fphar.2018.00556 29892224 PMC5985434 79 Duncan M.J. Interacting influences of aging and Alzheimer’s disease on circadian rhythms. Eur. J. Neurosci. 2020 51 1 310 325 10.1111/ejn.14358 30689226 80 He Y. Li Y. Zhou F. Qi J. Wu M. Decreased circadian fluctuation in cognitive behaviors and synaptic plasticity in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Metab. Brain Dis. 2020 35 2 343 352 10.1007/s11011-019-00531-z 31879834 81 Bellanti F. Iannelli G. Blonda M. Tamborra R. Villani R. Romano A. Calcagnini S. Mazzoccoli G. Vinciguerra M. Gaetani S. Giudetti A.M. Vendemiale G. Cassano T. Serviddio G. Alterations of clock gene RNA expression in brain regions of a triple transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2017 59 2 615 631 10.3233/JAD-160942 28671110 PMC5523844 82 Naseri Kouzehgarani G. Bothwell M.Y. Gillette M.U. Circadian rhythm of redox state regulates membrane excitability in hippocampal CA1 neurons. Eur. J. Neurosci. 2020 51 1 34 46 10.1111/ejn.14334 30614107 PMC6609501 83 Deibel S.H. Zelinski E.L. Keeley R.J. Kovalchuk O. McDonald R.J. Epigenetic alterations in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and hippocampus contribute to age-related cognitive decline. Oncotarget 2015 6 27 23181 23203 10.18632/oncotarget.4036 26252151 PMC4695111 84 Cermakian N. Waddington Lamont E. Boudreau P. Boivin D.B. Circadian clock gene expression in brain regions of Alzheimer’s disease patients and control subjects. J. Biol. Rhythms 2011 26 2 160 170 10.1177/0748730410395732 21454296 85 Weissová K. Bartoš A. Sládek M. Nováková M. Sumová A. Moderate changes in the circadian system of Alzheimer’s disease patients detected in their home environment. PLoS One 2016 11 1 e0146200 10.1371/journal.pone.0146200 26727258 PMC4701009 86 Kang J. Choi H.J. Isaacs G.D. Sung W. Kim H.J. Amyloid burden in Alzheimer’s disease patients is associated with alterations in circadian rhythm. Dement. Neurocognitive Disord. 2021 20 4 99 107 10.12779/dnd.2021.20.4.99 34795773 PMC8585536 87 Fusilier A.R. Davis J.A. Paul J.R. Yates S.D. McMeekin L.J. Goode L.K. Mokashi M.V. Remiszewski N. van Groen T. Cowell R.M. McMahon L.L. Roberson E.D. Gamble K.L. Dysregulated clock gene expression and abnormal diurnal regulation of hippocampal inhibitory transmission and spatial memory in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice. Neurobiol. Dis. 2021 158 105454 10.1016/j.nbd.2021.105454 34333153 PMC8477442 88 Vincent B. Protective roles of melatonin against the amyloid-dependent development of Alzheimer’s disease: A critical review. Pharmacol. Res. 2018 134 223 237 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.06.011 29981776 89 Verma A.K. Singh S. Garg G. Rizvi S.I. Melatonin exerts neuroprotection in a chronodisrupted rat model through reduction in oxidative stress and modulation of autophagy. Chronobiol. Int. 2022 39 1 45 56 10.1080/07420528.2021.1966025 34384302 90 Arnes M. Alaniz M.E. Karam C.S. Cho J.D. Lopez G. Javitch J.A. Santa-Maria I. Role of tau protein in remodeling of circadian neuronal circuits and sleep. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2019 11 320 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00320 31824299 PMC6881280 91 Luengo E. Buendia I. Fernández-Mendívil C. Trigo-Alonso P. Negredo P. Michalska P. Hernández-García B. Sánchez-Ramos C. Bernal J.A. Ikezu T. León R. López M.G. Pharmacological doses of melatonin impede cognitive decline in tau-related Alzheimer models, once tauopathy is initiated, by restoring the autophagic flux. J. Pineal Res. 2019 67 1 e12578 10.1111/jpi.12578 30943316 92 Balmik A.A. Chinnathambi S. Multi-faceted role of melatonin in neuroprotection and amelioration of Tau aggregates in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2018 62 4 1481 1493 10.3233/JAD-170900 29562506 93 Balmik A.A. Das R. Dangi A. Gorantla N.V. Marelli U.K. Chinnathambi S. Melatonin interacts with repeat domain of Tau to mediate disaggregation of paired helical filaments. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj. 2020 1864 3 129467 10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.129467 31715192 94 Chang Y.C. Kim J.Y. Therapeutic implications of circadian clocks in neurodegenerative diseases. J. Neurosci. Res. 2020 98 6 1095 1113 10.1002/jnr.24572 31833091 95 Figueiro M.G. Plitnick B. Roohan C. Sahin L. Kalsher M. Rea M.S. Effects of a tailored lighting intervention on sleep quality, rest-activity, mood, and behavior in older adults with Alzheimer disease and related dementias: A randomized clinical trial. J. Clin. Sleep Med. 2019 15 12 1757 1767 10.5664/jcsm.8078 31855161 PMC7099185 96 Musiek E.S. Circadian clock disruption in neurodegenerative diseases: cause and effect? Front. Pharmacol. 2015 6 29 10.3389/fphar.2015.00029 25774133 PMC4343016 97 Wang M. Yu H. Li S. Xiang Y. Le W. Altered biological rhythm and alzheimer’s disease: A bidirectional relationship. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 2021 18 9 667 675 10.2174/1567205018666211124104710 34819005 98 Jenwitheesuk A. Nopparat C. Mukda S. Wongchitrat P. Govitrapong P. Melatonin regulates aging and neurodegeneration through energy metabolism, epigenetics, autophagy and circadian rhythm pathways. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2014 15 9 16848 16884 10.3390/ijms150916848 25247581 PMC4200827 99 Hunt T. Sassone-Corsi P. Riding tandem: circadian clocks and the cell cycle. Cell 2007 129 3 461 464 10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.015 17482541 100 Kondratov R.V. Antoch M.P. The clock proteins, aging, and tumorigenesis. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 2007 72 1 477 482 10.1101/sqb.2007.72.050 18419307 101 Tomashevski A. Husseman J. Jin L.W. Nochlin D. Vincent I. Constitutive Wee1 activity in adult brain neurons with M phase-type alterations in Alzheimer neurodegeneration. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2001 3 2 195 207 10.3233/JAD-2001-3205 12214061 102 de Borsetti N.H. Dean B.J. Bain E.J. Clanton J.A. Taylor R.W. Gamse J.T. Light and melatonin schedule neuronal differentiation in the habenular nuclei. Dev. Biol. 2011 358 1 251 261 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.07.038 21840306 PMC3171612 103 Fredrich M. Hampel M. Seidel K. Christ E. Korf H.W. Impact of melatonin receptor-signaling on Zeitgeber time-dependent changes in cell proliferation and apoptosis in the adult murine hippocampus. Hippocampus 2017 27 5 495 506 10.1002/hipo.22706 28100031 104 Tamai S. Sanada K. Fukada Y. Time-of-day-dependent enhancement of adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus. PLoS One 2008 3 12 e3835 10.1371/journal.pone.0003835 19048107 PMC2585014 105 Goergen E.M. Bagay L.A. Rehm K. Benton J.L. Beltz B.S. Circadian control of neurogenesis. J. Neurobiol. 2002 53 1 90 95 10.1002/neu.10095 12360586 106 Akle V. Stankiewicz A.J. Kharchenko V. Yu L. Kharchenko P.V. Zhdanova I.V. Circadian kinetics of cell cycle progression in adult neurogenic niches of a diurnal vertebrate. J. Neurosci. 2017 37 7 1900 1909 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3222-16.2017 28087763 PMC5320617 107 Malik A. Kondratov R.V. Jamasbi R.J. Geusz M.E. Circadian clock genes are essential for normal adult neurogenesis, differentiation, and fate determination. PLoS One 2015 10 10 e0139655 10.1371/journal.pone.0139655 26439128 PMC4595423 108 Bouchard-Cannon P. Mendoza-Viveros L. Yuen A. Kærn M. Cheng H.Y.M. The circadian molecular clock regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis by controlling the timing of cell-cycle entry and exit. Cell Rep. 2013 5 4 961 973 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.10.037 24268780 109 Lin A.W. Barradas M. Stone J.C. van Aelst L. Serrano M. Lowe S.W. Premature senescence involving p53 and p16 is activated in response to constitutive MEK/MAPK mitogenic signaling. Genes Dev. 1998 12 19 3008 3019 10.1101/gad.12.19.3008 9765203 PMC317198 110 Ben-Moshe Livne Z. Alon S. Vallone D. Bayleyen Y. Tovin A. Shainer I. Nisembaum L.G. Aviram I. Smadja-Storz S. Fuentes M. Falcón J. Eisenberg E. Klein D.C. Burgess H.A. Foulkes N.S. Gothilf Y. Genetically blocking the zebrafish pineal clock affects circadian behavior. PLoS Genet. 2016 12 11 e1006445 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006445 27870848 PMC5147766 111 Saeed Y. Abbott S.M. Circadian disruption associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep. 2017 17 4 29 10.1007/s11910-017-0745-y 28324298 112 Ohnuma S. Harris W.A. Neurogenesis and the cell cycle. Neuron 2003 40 2 199 208 10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00632-9 14556704 113 Cremisi F. Philpott A. Ohnuma S. Cell cycle and cell fate interactions in neural development. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2003 13 1 26 33 10.1016/S0959-4388(03)00005-9 12593979 114 Edlund T. Jessell T.M. Progression from extrinsic to intrinsic signaling in cell fate specification: a view from the nervous system. Cell 1999 96 2 211 224 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80561-9 9988216 115 Ohnuma S. Philpott A. Harris W.A. Cell cycle and cell fate in the nervous system. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2001 11 1 66 73 10.1016/S0959-4388(00)00175-6 11179874 116 Herrup K. Yang Y. Cell cycle regulation in the postmitotic neuron: oxymoron or new biology? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2007 8 5 368 378 10.1038/nrn2124 17453017 117 Frank C.L. Tsai L.H. Alternative functions of core cell cycle regulators in neuronal migration, neuronal maturation, and synaptic plasticity. Neuron 2009 62 3 312 326 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.03.029 19447088 PMC2757047 118 Lim S. Kaldis P. Cdks, cyclins and CKIs: roles beyond cell cycle regulation. Development 2013 140 15 3079 3093 10.1242/dev.091744 23861057 119 Klein J.A. Ackerman S.L. Oxidative stress, cell cycle, and neurodegeneration. J. Clin. Invest. 2003 111 6 785 793 10.1172/JCI200318182 12639981 PMC153779 120 Becker E.B.E. Bonni A. Cell cycle regulation of neuronal apoptosis in development and disease. Prog. Neurobiol. 2004 72 1 1 25 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2003.12.005 15019174 121 McShea A. Harris P.L. Webster K.R. Wahl A.F. Smith M.A. Abnormal expression of the cell cycle regulators P16 and CDK4 in Alzheimer’s disease. Am. J. Pathol. 1997 150 6 1933 1939 9176387 PMC1858317 122 Vincent I. Pae C.I. Hallows J.L. The cell cycle and human neurodegenerative disease. Prog. Cell Cycle Res. 2003 5 31 41 14593698 123 Ueberham U. Hessel A. Arendt T. Cyclin C expression is involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 2003 24 3 427 435 10.1016/S0197-4580(02)00132-X 12600719 124 Herrup K. The involvement of cell cycle events in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 2010 2 3 13 10.1186/alzrt37 20497605 PMC2919693 125 Webber K.M. Raina A.K. Marlatt M.W. Zhu X. Prat M.I. Morelli L. Casadesus G. Perry G. Smith M.A. The cell cycle in Alzheimer disease: A unique target for neuropharmacology. Mech. Ageing Dev. 2005 126 10 1019 1025 10.1016/j.mad.2005.03.024 15936057 126 Shen Y. He P. Zhong Z. McAllister C. Lindholm K. Distinct destructive signal pathways of neuronal death in Alzheimer’s disease. Trends Mol. Med. 2006 12 12 574 579 10.1016/j.molmed.2006.10.002 17055782 127 Zhou Z. Bai J. Zhong S. Zhang R. Kang K. Zhang X. Xu Y. Zhao C. Zhao M. Integrative functional genomic analysis of molecular signatures and mechanistic pathways in the cell cycle underlying Alzheimer’s disease. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2021 2021 1 11 10.1155/2021/5552623 34336099 PMC8290224 128 Yuen S.C. Lee S.M.Y. Leung S. Putative factors interfering cell cycle re-entry in Alzheimer’s disease: An omics study with differential expression meta-analytics and co-expression profiling. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2022 85 3 1373 1398 10.3233/JAD-215349 34924393 129 Lars R.T.A. Gärtner U. Holzer M. Holzer M. Expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p16 in Alzheimerʼs disease. Neuroreport 1996 7 18 3047 3050 10.1097/00001756-199611250-00050 9116237 130 Arendt T. Holzer M. Gärtner U. Neuronal expression of cycline dependent kinase inhibitors of the INK4 family in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neural Transm. (Vienna) 1998 105 8-9 949 960 10.1007/s007020050104 9869328 131 García-Osta A. Dong J. Moreno-Aliaga M.J. Ramirez M.J. p27, the cell cycle and Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 23 3 1211 10.3390/ijms23031211 35163135 PMC8835212 132 Shiu S.Y.W. Leung W.Y. Tam C.W. Liu V.W.S. Yao K.M. Melatonin MT1 receptor-induced transcriptional up-regulation of p27Kip1 in prostate cancer antiproliferation is mediated via inhibition of constitutively active nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB): potential implications on prostate cancer chemoprevention and. J. Pineal Res. 2013 54 1 69 79 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2012.01026.x 22856547 133 Giovanni A. Wirtz-Brugger F. Keramaris E. Slack R. Park D.S. Involvement of cell cycle elements, cyclin-dependent kinases, pRb, and E2F x DP, in B-amyloid-induced neuronal death. J. Biol. Chem. 1999 274 27 19011 19016 10.1074/jbc.274.27.19011 10383401 134 Modi P.K. Komaravelli N. Singh N. Sharma P. Interplay between MEK-ERK signaling, cyclin D1, and cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulates cell cycle reentry and apoptosis of neurons. Mol. Biol. Cell 2012 23 18 3722 3730 10.1091/mbc.e12-02-0125 22833568 PMC3442418 135 Sanphui P. Pramanik S.K. Chatterjee N. Moorthi P. Banerji B. Biswas S.C. Efficacy of cyclin dependent kinase 4 inhibitors as potent neuroprotective agents against insults relevant to Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One 2013 8 11 e78842 10.1371/journal.pone.0078842 24244372 PMC3823981 136 Tajes O.M. Pelegrí G.C. Vilaplana H.J. Pallàs L.M. Camins E.A. An evaluation of the neuroprotective effects of melatonin in an in vitro experimental model of age-induced neuronal apoptosis. J. Pineal Res. 2009 46 3 262 267 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2008.00656.x 19196437 137 Absalon S. Kochanek D.M. Raghavan V. Krichevsky A.M. MiR-26b, upregulated in Alzheimer’s disease, activates cell cycle entry, tau-phosphorylation, and apoptosis in postmitotic neurons. J. Neurosci. 2013 33 37 14645 14659 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1327-13.2013 24027266 PMC3810537 138 Meeker R. Williams K. The p75 neurotrophin receptor: at the crossroad of neural repair and death. Neural Regen. Res. 2015 10 5 721 725 10.4103/1673-5374.156967 26109945 PMC4468762 139 Zeng F. Lu J.J. Zhou X.F. Wang Y.J. Roles of p75NTR in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: A novel therapeutic target. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2011 82 10 1500 1509 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.06.040 21762680 140 Yao X-Q. Jiao S-S. Saadipour K. Zeng F. Wang Q-H. Zhu C. Shen L-L. Zeng G-H. Liang C-R. Wang J. Liu Y-H. Hou H-Y. Xu X. Su Y-P. Fan X-T. Xiao H-L. Lue L-F. Zeng Y-Q. Giunta B. Zhong J-H. Walker D.G. Zhou H-D. Tan J. Zhou X-F. Wang Y-J. p75NTR ectodomain is a physiological neuroprotective molecule against amyloid-beta toxicity in the brain of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Psychiatry 2015 20 11 1301 1310 10.1038/mp.2015.49 25917367 PMC4759103 141 Simmons D.A. Knowles J.K. Belichenko N.P. Banerjee G. Finkle C. Massa S.M. Longo F.M. A small molecule p75NTR ligand, LM11A-31, reverses cholinergic neurite dystrophy in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models with mid- to late-stage disease progression. PLoS One 2014 9 8 e102136 10.1371/journal.pone.0102136 25153701 PMC4143160 142 Olivieri G. Otten U. Meier F. Baysang G. Dimitriades-Schmutz B. Müller-Spahn F. Savaskan E. Oxidative stress modulates tyrosine kinase receptor A and p75 receptor (low-affinity nerve growth factor receptor) expression in SHSY5Y neuroblastoma cells. Neurol. Clin. Neurophysiol. 2002 2002 2 2 10 10.1162/153840902753658329 12028822 143 Olivieri G. Otten U. Meier F. Baysang G. Dimitriades-Schmutz B. Müller-Spahn F. Savaskan E. β-amyloid modulates tyrosine kinase B receptor expression in SHSY5Y neuroblastoma cells: influence of the antioxidant melatonin. Neuroscience 2003 120 3 659 665 10.1016/S0306-4522(03)00342-7 12895507 144 Zhang J. Cicero S.A. Wang L. Romito-DiGiacomo R.R. Yang Y. Herrup K. Nuclear localization of Cdk5 is a key determinant in the postmitotic state of neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008 105 25 8772 8777 10.1073/pnas.0711355105 18550843 PMC2438417 145 Majd S. Zarifkar A. Rastegar K. Takhshid M.A. Different fibrillar Aβ1-42 concentrations induce adult hippocampal neurons to reenter various phases of the cell cycle. Brain Res. 2008 1218 224 229 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.04.050 18533137 146 Su L.Y. Li H. Lv L. Feng Y.M. Li G.D. Luo R. Zhou H.J. Lei X.G. Ma L. Li J.L. Xu L. Hu X.T. Yao Y.G. Melatonin attenuates MPTP-induced neurotoxicity via preventing CDK5-mediated autophagy and SNCA/α-synuclein aggregation. Autophagy 2015 11 10 1745 1759 10.1080/15548627.2015.1082020 26292069 PMC4824603 147 Patrick G.N. Zukerberg L. Nikolic M. de la Monte S. Dikkes P. Tsai L.H. Conversion of p35 to p25 deregulates Cdk5 activity and promotes neurodegeneration. Nature 1999 402 6762 615 622 10.1038/45159 10604467 148 Song W.J. Son M.Y. Lee H.W. Seo H. Kim J.H. Chung S.H. Enhancement of BACE1 activity by p25/Cdk5-mediated phosphorylation in Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One 2015 10 8 e0136950 10.1371/journal.pone.0136950 26317805 PMC4552876 149 Zheng Y.L. Kesavapany S. Gravell M. Hamilton R.S. Schubert M. Amin N. Albers W. Grant P. Pant H.C.A. Cdk5 inhibitory peptide reduces tau hyperphosphorylation and apoptosis in neurons. EMBO J. 2005 24 1 209 220 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600441 15592431 PMC544899 150 Maitra S. Vincent B. Cdk5-p25 as a key element linking amyloid and tau pathologies in Alzheimer’s disease: Mechanisms and possible therapeutic interventions. Life Sci. 2022 308 120986 10.1016/j.lfs.2022.120986 36152679 151 Zhang J. Li H. Yabut O. Fitzpatrick H. D’Arcangelo G. Herrup K. Cdk5 suppresses the neuronal cell cycle by disrupting the E2F1-DP1 complex. J. Neurosci. 2010 30 15 5219 5228 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5628-09.2010 20392944 PMC2862267 152 Zhang J. Herrup K. Nucleocytoplasmic Cdk5 is involved in neuronal cell cycle and death in post-mitotic neurons. Cell Cycle 2011 10 8 1208 1214 10.4161/cc.10.8.15328 21415596 153 Mushtaq G. Greig N.H. Anwar F. Al-Abbasi F.A. Zamzami M.A. Al-Talhi H.A. Kamal M.A. Neuroprotective mechanisms mediated by CDK5 inhibition. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2016 22 5 527 534 10.2174/1381612822666151124235028 26601962 PMC5002348 154 Alvira D. Tajes M. Verdaguer E. Acuña-Castroviejo D. Folch J. Camins A. Pallas M. Inhibition of the cdk5/p25 fragment formation may explain the antiapoptotic effects of melatonin in an experimental model of Parkinson’s disease. J. Pineal Res. 2006 40 3 251 258 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2005.00308.x 16499562 155 Wang S. Zhu L. Shi H. Zheng H. Tian Q. Wang Q. Liu R. Wang J.Z. Inhibition of melatonin biosynthesis induces neurofilament hyperphosphorylation with activation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5. Neurochem. Res. 2007 32 8 1329 1335 10.1007/s11064-007-9308-y 17401652 156 Gutierrez-Cuesta J. Sureda F.X. Romeu M. Canudas A.M. Caballero B. Coto-Montes A. Camins A. Pallàs M. Chronic administration of melatonin reduces cerebral injury biomarkers in SAMP8. J. Pineal Res. 2007 42 4 394 402 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2007.00433.x 17439556 157 Cini G. Neri B. Pacini A. Cesati V. Sassoli C. Quattrone S. D’Apolito M. Fazio A. Scapagnini G. Provenzani A. Quattrone A. Antiproliferative activity of melatonin by transcriptional inhibition of cyclin D1 expression: a molecular basis for melatonin-induced oncostatic effects. J. Pineal Res. 2005 39 1 12 20 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2004.00206.x 15978052 158 Liu L. Xu Y. Reiter R.J. Melatonin inhibits the proliferation of human osteosarcoma cell line MG-63. Bone 2013 55 2 432 438 10.1016/j.bone.2013.02.021 23470834 159 Lee M. Kwon Y.T. Li M. Peng J. Friedlander R.M. Tsai L.H. Neurotoxicity induces cleavage of p35 to p25 by calpain. Nature 2000 405 6784 360 364 10.1038/35012636 10830966 160 Suwanjang W. Abramov A.Y. Govitrapong P. Chetsawang B. Melatonin attenuates dexamethasone toxicity-induced oxidative stress, calpain and caspase activation in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2013 138 116 122 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2013.04.008 23688838 161 Liu L. Zhu Y. Xu Y. Reiter R.J. Melatonin delays cell proliferation by inducing G1 and G2/M phase arrest in a human osteoblastic cell line hFOB 1.19. J. Pineal Res. 2011 50 2 222 231 10.1111/jpi.12023 21108658 162 Quiros I. Mayo J.C. Garcia-Suarez O. Hevia D. Martin V. Rodríguez C. Sainz R.M. Melatonin prevents glucocorticoid inhibition of cell proliferation and toxicity in hippocampal cells by reducing glucocorticoid receptor nuclear translocation. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2008 110 1-2 116 124 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2008.02.009 18395440 163 Janel N. Sarazin M. Corlier F. Corne H. de Souza L.C. Hamelin L. Aka A. Lagarde J. Blehaut H. Hindié V. Rain J-C. Arbones M.L. Dubois B. Potier M.C. Bottlaender M. Delabar J.M. Plasma DYRK1A as a novel risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. Transl. Psychiatry 2014 4 8 e425 10.1038/tp.2014.61 25116835 PMC4150238 164 Coutadeur S. Benyamine H. Delalonde L. de Oliveira C. Leblond B. Foucourt A. Besson T. Casagrande A.S. Taverne T. Girard A. Pando M.P. Désiré L. A novel DYRK1A (Dual specificity tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A) inhibitor for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: effect on Tau and amyloid pathologies in vitro. J. Neurochem. 2015 133 3 440 451 10.1111/jnc.13018 25556849 165 Stotani S. Giordanetto F. Medda F. DYRK1A inhibition as potential treatment for Alzheimer’s disease. Future Med. Chem. 2016 8 6 681 696 10.4155/fmc-2016-0013 27073990 166 Chen J.Y. Lin J.R. Tsai F.C. Meyer T. Dosage of Dyrk1a shifts cells within a p21-cyclin D1 signaling map to control the decision to enter the cell cycle. Mol. Cell 2013 52 1 87 100 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.09.009 24119401 PMC4039290 167 Kimura R. Kamino K. Yamamoto M. Nuripa A. Kida T. Kazui H. Hashimoto R. Tanaka T. Kudo T. Yamagata H. Tabara Y. Miki T. Akatsu H. Kosaka K. Funakoshi E. Nishitomi K. Sakaguchi G. Kato A. Hattori H. Uema T. Takeda M. The DYRK1A gene, encoded in chromosome 21 Down syndrome critical region, bridges between β-amyloid production and tau phosphorylation in Alzheimer disease. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2007 16 1 15 23 10.1093/hmg/ddl437 17135279 168 Maenz B. Hekerman P. Vela E.M. Galceran J. Becker W. Characterization of the human DYRK1A promoter and its regulation by the transcription factor E2F1. BMC Mol. Biol. 2008 9 1 30 10.1186/1471-2199-9-30 18366763 PMC2292204 169 Jordan-Sciutto K.L. Malaiyandi L.M. Bowser R. Altered distribution of cell cycle transcriptional regulators during Alzheimer disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 2002 61 4 358 367 10.1093/jnen/61.4.358 11939591 PMC3683585 170 Sharma S. Sarkar J. Haldar C. Sinha S. Melatonin reverses Fas, E2F-1 and endoplasmic reticulum stress mediated apoptosis and dysregulation of autophagy induced by the herbicide atrazine in murine splenocytes. PLoS One 2014 9 9 e108602 10.1371/journal.pone.0108602 25259610 PMC4178181 171 Arron J.R. Winslow M.M. Polleri A. Chang C.P. Wu H. Gao X. Neilson J.R. Chen L. Heit J.J. Kim S.K. Yamasaki N. Miyakawa T. Francke U. Graef I.A. Crabtree G.R. NFAT dysregulation by increased dosage of DSCR1 and DYRK1A on chromosome 21. Nature 2006 441 7093 595 600 10.1038/nature04678 16554754 172 Lee Y. Ha J. Kim H.J. Kim Y.S. Chang E.J. Song W.J. Kim H.H. Negative feedback Inhibition of NFATc1 by DYRK1A regulates bone homeostasis. J. Biol. Chem. 2009 284 48 33343 33351 10.1074/jbc.M109.042234 19801542 PMC2785177 173 Pedrosa A.M.C. Weinlich R. Mognol G.P. Robbs B.K. Viola J.P.B. Campa A. Amarante-Mendes G.P. Melatonin protects CD4+ T cells from activation-induced cell death by blocking NFAT-mediated CD95 ligand upregulation. J. Immunol. 2010 184 7 3487 3494 10.4049/jimmunol.0902961 20181888 174 Wang J. Ma S.F. Yun Q. Liu W.J. Zhai H.R. Shi H.Z. Xie L.G. Qian J.J. Zhao C.J. Zhang W.N. FOXG1 as a potential therapeutic target for Alzheimer’s disease with a particular focus on cell cycle regulation. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2022 86 3 1255 1273 10.3233/JAD-215144 35180113 175 Liu B. Zhou K. Wu X. Zhao C. Foxg1 deletion impairs the development of the epithalamus. Mol. Brain 2018 11 1 5 10.1186/s13041-018-0350-2 29394901 PMC5797387 176 Bailis J.M. Forsburg S.L. MCM proteins: DNA damage, mutagenesis and repair. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 2004 14 1 17 21 10.1016/j.gde.2003.11.002 15108800 177 Wharton S.B. Williams G.H. Stoeber K. Gelsthorpe C.H. Baxter L. Johnson A.L. Ince P.G. Expression of Ki67, PCNA and the chromosome replication licensing protein Mcm2 in glial cells of the ageing human hippocampus increases with the burden of Alzheimer-type pathology. Neurosci. Lett. 2005 383 1-2 33 38 10.1016/j.neulet.2005.04.019 15936508 178 Bonda D.J. Evans T.A. Santocanale C. Llosá J.C. Viňa J. Bajic V.P. Castellani R.J. Siedlak S.L. Perry G. Smith M.A. Lee H. Evidence for the progression through S-phase in the ectopic cell cycle re-entry of neurons in Alzheimer disease. Aging (Albany NY) 2009 1 4 382 388 10.18632/aging.100044 19946466 PMC2783633 179 Busser J. Geldmacher D.S. Herrup K. Ectopic cell cycle proteins predict the sites of neuronal cell death in Alzheimer’s disease brain. J. Neurosci. 1998 18 8 2801 2807 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-08-02801.1998 9525997 PMC6792587 180 Zhong Z.M. Li T. Xu Z.X. Meng T.T. Zeng J.H. Zheng S. Ye W.B. Wu Q. Chen J.T. Effect of melatonin on the proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes from rat vertebral body growth plate in vitro. Int. J. Med. Sci. 2013 10 10 1392 1398 10.7150/ijms.5645 23983601 PMC3752726 181 Katsel P. Tan W. Fam P. Purohit D.P. Haroutunian V. Cell cycle checkpoint abnormalities during dementia: A plausible association with the loss of protection against oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One 2013 8 7 e68361 10.1371/journal.pone.0068361 23861893 PMC3702571 182 Leem J. Bai G.Y. Kim J.S. Oh J.S. Melatonin protects mouse oocytes from DNA damage by enhancing nonhomologous end‐joining repair. J. Pineal Res. 2019 67 4 e12603 10.1111/jpi.12603 31370106 183 Majidinia M. Sadeghpour A. Mehrzadi S. Reiter R.J. Khatami N. Yousefi B. Melatonin: A pleiotropic molecule that modulates DNA damage response and repair pathways. J. Pineal Res. 2017 63 1 e12416 10.1111/jpi.12416 28439991 184 Kitamura Y. Shimohama S. Kamoshima W. Matsuoka Y. Nomura Y. Taniguchi T. Changes of p53 in the brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1997 232 2 418 421 10.1006/bbrc.1997.6301 9125193 185 Hooper C. Meimaridou E. Tavassoli M. Melino G. Lovestone S. Killick R. p53 is upregulated in Alzheimer’s disease and induces tau phosphorylation in HEK293a cells. Neurosci. Lett. 2007 418 1 34 37 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.03.026 17399897 PMC1885960 186 Schindowski K. Belarbi K. Bretteville A. Ando K. Buee L. Neurogenesis and cell cycle-reactivated neuronal death during pathogenic tau aggregation. Genes Brain Behav. 2008 S1 92 100 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2007.00377.x PMC2239302 18184373 187 El-Missiry M.A. Othman A.I. Al-Abdan M.A. El-Sayed A.A. Melatonin ameliorates oxidative stress, modulates death receptor pathway proteins, and protects the rat cerebrum against bisphenol-A-induced apoptosis. J. Neurol. Sci. 2014 347 1-2 251 256 10.1016/j.jns.2014.10.009 25454643 188 Omata Y. Lim Y.M. Akao Y. Tsuda L. Age-induced reduction of autophagy-related gene expression is associated with onset of Alzheimer’s disease. Am. J. Neurodegener. Dis. 2014 3 3 134 142 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/pmc4299720/ 25628964 PMC4299720 189 Qin W. Zhao W. Ho L. Wang J. Walsh K. Gandy S. Pasinetti G.M. Regulation of forkhead transcription factor FoxO3a contributes to calorie restriction-induced prevention of Alzheimer’s disease-type amyloid neuropathology and spatial memory deterioration. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2008 1147 1 335 347 10.1196/annals.1427.024 19076455 PMC2605640 190 Cuesta S. Kireev R. García C. Rancan L. Vara E. Tresguerres J.A.F. Melatonin can improve insulin resistance and aging-induced pancreas alterations in senescence-accelerated prone male mice (SAMP8). Age (Omaha) 2013 35 3 659 671 10.1007/s11357-012-9397-7 22411259 PMC3636397 191 Jenwitheesuk A. Boontem P. Wongchitrat P. Tocharus J. Mukda S. Govitrapong P. Melatonin regulates the aging mouse hippocampal homeostasis via the sirtuin1-FOXO1 pathway. EXCLI J. 2017 16 340 353 10.17179/excli2016-852 28507478 PMC5427465 192 Yuan Z. Becker E.B.E. Merlo P. Yamada T. DiBacco S. Konishi Y. Schaefer E.M. Bonni A. Activation of FOXO1 by Cdk1 in cycling cells and postmitotic neurons. Science 2008 319 5870 1665 1668 10.1126/science.1152337 18356527 193 Majdzadeh N. Wang L. Morrison B.E. Bassel-Duby R. Olson E.N. D’Mello S.R. HDAC4 inhibits cell-cycle progression and protects neurons from cell death. Dev. Neurobiol. 2008 68 8 1076 1092 10.1002/dneu.20637 18498087 PMC2722383 194 Harris P. Zhu X. Pamies C. Rottkamp C.A. Ghanbari H.A. McShea A. Feng Y. Ferris D.K. Smith M.A. Neuronal polo-like kinase in Alzheimer disease indicates cell cycle changes. Neurobiol. Aging 2000 21 6 837 841 10.1016/S0197-4580(00)00218-9 11124427 195 Song B. Davis K. Liu X.S. Lee H. Smith M. Liu X. Inhibition of Polo-like kinase 1 reduces beta-amyloid-induced neuronal cell death in Alzheimer’s disease. Aging (Albany NY) 2011 3 9 846 851 10.18632/aging.100382 21931181 PMC3227450 196 Liu L. Xu Y. Reiter R.J. Pan Y. Chen D. Liu Y. Pu X. Jiang L. Li Z. Inhibition of ERK1/2 signaling pathway is involved in melatonin’s antiproliferative effect on human MG-63 osteosarcoma cells. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 2016 39 6 2297 2307 10.1159/000447922 27832629 197 Villanueva J. Yung Y. Walker J.L. Assoian R.K. ERK activity and G1 phase progression: identifying dispensable versus essential activities and primary versus secondary targets. Mol. Biol. Cell 2007 18 4 1457 1463 10.1091/mbc.e06-10-0908 17314399 PMC1838994 198 Cieślik M. Czapski G.A. Strosznajder J.B. The molecular mechanism of amyloid b42 peptide toxicity: the role of sphingosine kinase-1 and mitochondrial sirtuins. PLoS One 2015 10 9 e0137193 10.1371/journal.pone.0137193 26334640 PMC4567180 199 Delobel P. Lavenir I. Ghetti B. Holzer M. Goedert M. Cell-cycle markers in a transgenic mouse model of human tauopathy: increased levels of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p21Cip1 and p27Kip1. Am. J. Pathol. 2006 168 3 878 887 10.2353/ajpath.2006.050540 16507903 PMC1606514 200 Khurana V. Lu Y. Steinhilb M.L. Oldham S. Shulman J.M. Feany M.B. TOR-mediated cell-cycle activation causes neurodegeneration in a Drosophila tauopathy model. Curr. Biol. 2006 16 3 230 241 10.1016/j.cub.2005.12.042 16461276 201 Khurana V. Feany M.B. Connecting cell-cycle activation to neurodegeneration in Drosophila. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 2007 1772 4 446 456 10.1016/j.bbadis.2006.10.007 17141486 PMC2562667 202 Zhu L.Q. Wang S.H. Ling Z.Q. Wang D.L. Wang J.Z. Effect of inhibiting melatonin biosynthesis on spatial memory retention and tau phosphorylation in rat. J. Pineal Res. 2004 37 2 71 77 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2004.00136.x 15298664 203 Lin L. Huang Q.X. Yang S.S. Chu J. Wang J.Z. Tian Q. Melatonin in Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2013 14 7 14575 14593 10.3390/ijms140714575 23857055 PMC3742260 204 Bhaskar K. Miller M. Chludzinski A. Herrup K. Zagorski M. Lamb B.T. The PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway regulates Aβ oligomer induced neuronal cell cycle events. Mol. Neurodegener. 2009 4 1 14 10.1186/1750-1326-4-14 19291319 PMC2663563 205 Shukla M. Htoo H.H. Wintachai P. Hernandez J.F. Dubois C. Postina R. Xu H. Checler F. Smith D.R. Govitrapong P. Vincent B. Melatonin stimulates the nonamyloidogenic processing of β APP through the positive transcriptional regulation of ADAM10 and ADAM17. J. Pineal Res. 2015 58 2 151 165 10.1111/jpi.12200 25491598 206 Panmanee J. Nopparat C. Chavanich N. Shukla M. Mukda S. Song W. Vincent B. Govitrapong P. Melatonin regulates the transcription of βAPP-cleaving secretases mediated through melatonin receptors in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. J. Pineal Res. 2015 59 3 308 320 10.1111/jpi.12260 26123100 207 Chinchalongporn V. Shukla M. Govitrapong P. Melatonin ameliorates Aβ 42 -induced alteration of βAPP-processing secretases via the melatonin receptor through the Pin1/GSK3β/NF-κB pathway in SH-SY5Y cells. J. Pineal Res. 2018 64 4 e12470 10.1111/jpi.12470 29352484 208 Bialopiotrowicz E. Szybinska A. Kuzniewska B. Buizza L. Uberti D. Kuznicki J. Wojda U. Highly pathogenic Alzheimer’s disease presenilin 1 P117R mutation causes a specific increase in p53 and p21 protein levels and cell cycle dysregulation in human lymphocytes. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2012 32 2 397 415 10.3233/JAD-2012-121129 22810102 209 Yates S.C. Zafar A. Rabai E.M. Foxall J.B. Nagy S. Morrison K.E. Clarke C. Esiri M.M. Christie S. Smith A.D. Nagy Z. The effects of two polymorphisms on p21cip1 function and their association with Alzheimer’s disease in a population of European descent. PLoS One 2015 10 1 e0114050 10.1371/journal.pone.0114050 25625488 PMC4308198 210 Ma L. Liu Q. Tian M. Tian X. Gao L. Mechanisms of melatonin in anti-aging and its regulation effects in radiation-induced premature senescence. Radiation Med. Protect. 2021 2 1 33 37 10.1016/j.radmp.2021.01.003 211 Suwannakot K. Sritawan N. Prajit R. Aranarochana A. Sirichoat A. Pannangrong W. Wigmore P. Welbat J.U. Melatonin protects against the side-effects of 5-fluorouracil on hippocampal neurogenesis and ameliorates antioxidant activity in an adult rat hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Antioxidants 2021 10 4 615 10.3390/antiox10040615 33923672 PMC8074234 212 Tan Y.Z. Xu X.Y. Dai J.M. Yin Y. He X.T. Zhang Y.L. Zhu T.X. An Y. Tian B.M. Chen F.M. Melatonin induces the rejuvenation of long-term ex vivo expanded periodontal ligament stem cells by modulating the autophagic process. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2021 12 1 254 10.1186/s13287-021-02322-9 33926537 PMC8082824 213 Gustaw-Rothenberg K. Lerner A. Bonda D.J. Lee H. Zhu X. Perry G. Smith M.A. Biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease: past, present and future. Biomarkers Med. 2010 4 1 15 26 10.2217/bmm.09.86 20387301 PMC2855161 214 Kimball S.R. Abbas A. Jefferson L.S. Melatonin represses oxidative stress-induced activation of the MAP kinase and mTOR signaling pathways in H4IIE hepatoma cells through inhibition of Ras. J. Pineal Res. 2008 44 4 379 386 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2007.00539.x 18410586 PMC2638075 215 Koc S. Cayli S. Aksakal C. Ocakli S. Soyalic H. Somuk B.T. Yüce S. Protective effects of melatonin and selenium against apoptosis of olfactory sensory neurons: A rat model study. Am. J. Rhinol. Allergy 2016 30 3 e62 e66 10.2500/ajra.2016.30.4313 27216337 216 Dong Y. Fan C. Hu W. Jiang S. Ma Z. Yan X. Deng C. Di S. Xin Z. Wu G. Yang Y. Reiter R.J. Liang G. Melatonin attenuated early brain injury induced by subarachnoid hemorrhage via regulating NLRP3 inflammasome and apoptosis signaling. J. Pineal Res. 2016 60 3 253 262 10.1111/jpi.12300 26639408 217 Kwon K.J. Kim J.N. Kim M.K. Lee J. Ignarro L.J. Kim H.J. Shin C.Y. Han S.H. Melatonin synergistically increases resveratrol-induced heme oxygenase-1 expression through the inhibition of ubiquitin-dependent proteasome pathway: a possible role in neuroprotection. J. Pineal Res. 2010 50 2 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2010.00820.x 21073519 218 Zheng Q. Huang T. Zhang L. Zhou Y. Luo H. Xu H. Wang X. Dysregulation of ubiquitin-proteasome system in neurodegenerative diseases. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2016 8 303 10.3389/fnagi.2016.00303 28018215 PMC5156861 219 Chen Y. Liu W. McPhie D.L. Hassinger L. Neve R.L. APP-BP1 mediates APP-induced apoptosis and DNA synthesis and is increased in Alzheimer’s disease brain. J. Cell Biol. 2003 163 1 27 33 10.1083/jcb.200304003 14557245 PMC2173435 220 Chen Y. McPhie D.L. Hirschberg J. Neve R.L. The amyloid precursor protein-binding protein APP-BP1 drives the cell cycle through the S-M checkpoint and causes apoptosis in neurons. J. Biol. Chem. 2000 275 12 8929 8935 10.1074/jbc.275.12.8929 10722740 221 Tateishi K. Omata M. Tanaka K. Chiba T. The NEDD8 system is essential for cell cycle progression and morphogenetic pathway in mice. J. Cell Biol. 2001 155 4 571 580 10.1083/jcb.200104035 11696557 PMC2198877 222 Chen Y. Neve R.L. Liu H. Neddylation dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Cell. Mol. Med. 2012 16 11 2583 2591 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2012.01604.x 22805479 PMC3484225 223 Shukla M. Chinchalongporn V. Govitrapong P. Melatonin prevents neddylation dysfunction in Aβ42-exposed SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells by regulating the amyloid precursor protein-binding protein 1 pathway. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 2020 17 5 446 459 10.2174/1567205017666200624201356 32579500 224 Kruman I.I. Why do neurons enter the cell cycle? Cell Cycle 2004 3 6 767 771 10.4161/cc.3.6.901 15136759 225 Franco S. Blasco M.A. Siedlak S.L. Harris P.L.R. Moreira P.I. Perry G. Smith M.A. Telomeres and telomerase in Alzheimer’s disease: Epiphenomena or a new focus for therapeutic strategy? Alzheimers Dement. 2006 2 3 164 168 10.1016/j.jalz.2006.03.001 19595878 226 Zhu X. Lee H. Casadesus G. Avila J. Drew K. Perry G. Smith M.A. Oxidative imbalance in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 2005 31 1-3 205 218 10.1385/MN:31:1-3:205 15953822 227 Tan J.L. Li Q.X. Ciccotosto G.D. Crouch P.J. Culvenor J.G. White A.R. Evin G. Mild oxidative stress induces redistribution of BACE1 in non-apoptotic conditions and promotes the amyloidogenic processing of Alzheimer’s disease amyloid precursor protein. PLoS One 2013 8 4 e61246 10.1371/journal.pone.0061246 23613819 PMC3629182 228 Mouton-Liger F. Paquet C. Dumurgier J. Bouras C. Pradier L. Gray F. Hugon J. Oxidative stress increases BACE1 protein levels through activation of the PKR-eIF2α pathway. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 2012 1822 6 885 896 10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.01.009 22306812 229 Dunckley T. Beach T.G. Ramsey K.E. Grover A. Mastroeni D. Walker D.G. LaFleur B.J. Coon K.D. Brown K.M. Caselli R. Kukull W. Higdon R. McKeel D. Morris J.C. Hulette C. Schmechel D. Reiman E.M. Rogers J. Stephan D.A. Gene expression correlates of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 2006 27 10 1359 1371 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.08.013 16242812 PMC2259291 230 Zhou J.N. Liu R.Y. Kamphorst W. Hofman M.A. Swaab D.F. Early neuropathological Alzheimer’s changes in aged individuals are accompanied by decreased cerebrospinal fluid melatonin levels. J. Pineal Res. 2003 35 2 125 130 10.1034/j.1600-079X.2003.00065.x 12887656 231 Sunday O. Temitope O.T. Adekunle M.F. Elizabeth O.O. Olufunminyi A.J. Richard A.A. Samuel A.A. Alteration in antioxidants level and lipid peroxidation of patients with neurodegenerative diseases Alzheimer′s disease and Parkinson disease. Int. J. Nutr. Pharmacol. Neurol. Dis. 2014 4 3 146 152 https://www.ijnpnd.com/text.asp?2014/4/3/146/132671 10.4103/2231-0738.132671 232 Goc Z. Szaroma W. Kapusta E. Dziubek K. Protective effects of melatonin on the activity of SOD, CAT, GSH-Px and GSH content in organs of mice after administration of SNP. Chin. J. Physiol. 2017 60 1 1 10 10.4077/CJP.2017.BAF435 28052641 233 Migliore L. Coppedè F. Genetic and environmental factors in cancer and neurodegenerative diseases. Mutat. Res. Rev. Mutat. Res. 2002 512 2-3 135 153 10.1016/S1383-5742(02)00046-7 12464348 234 Erenberk U. Dundaroz R. Gok O. Uysal O. Agus S. Yuksel A. Yilmaz B. Kilic U. Melatonin attenuates phenytoin sodium-induced DNA damage. Drug Chem. Toxicol. 2014 37 2 233 239 10.3109/01480545.2013.838777 24171672 235 Guarente L. Sir2 links chromatin silencing, metabolism, and aging. Genes Dev. 2000 14 9 1021 1026 10.1101/gad.14.9.1021 10809662 236 Gong B. Pan Y. Vempati P. Zhao W. Knable L. Ho L. Wang J. Sastre M. Ono K. Sauve A.A. Pasinetti G.M. Nicotinamide riboside restores cognition through an upregulation of proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α regulated β-secretase 1 degradation and mitochondrial gene expression in Alzheimer’s mouse models. Neurobiol. Aging 2013 34 6 1581 1588 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.12.005 23312803 PMC3632303 237 Manchester L.C. Coto-Montes A. Boga J.A. Andersen L.P.H. Zhou Z. Galano A. Vriend J. Tan D.X. Reiter R.J. Melatonin: an ancient molecule that makes oxygen metabolically tolerable. J. Pineal Res. 2015 59 4 403 419 10.1111/jpi.12267 26272235 238 Reiter R.J. Mayo J.C. Tan D.X. Sainz R.M. Alatorre-Jimenez M. Qin L. Melatonin as an antioxidant: under promises but over delivers. J. Pineal Res. 2016 61 3 253 278 10.1111/jpi.12360 27500468 239 Tan D.X. Manchester L.C. Sainz R.M. Mayo J.C. Leon J. Hardeland R. Poeggeler B. Reiter R.J. Interactions between melatonin and nicotinamide nucleotide: NADH preservation in cells and in cell-free systems by melatonin. J. Pineal Res. 2005 39 2 185 194 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2005.00234.x 16098097 240 Ding K. Wang H. Xu J. Li T. Zhang L. Ding Y. Zhu L. He J. Zhou M. Melatonin stimulates antioxidant enzymes and reduces oxidative stress in experimental traumatic brain injury: the Nrf2–ARE signaling pathway as a potential mechanism. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2014 73 1 11 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.04.031 24810171 241 Farioli-Vecchioli S. Tirone F. Control of the cell cycle in adult neurogenesis and its relation with physical exercise. Brain Plast. 2015 1 1 41 54 10.3233/BPL-150013 29765834 PMC5928538 242 Beukelaers P. Vandenbosch R. Caron N. Nguyen L. Moonen G. Malgrange B. Cycling or not cycling: cell cycle regulatory molecules and adult neurogenesis. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2012 69 9 1493 1503 10.1007/s00018-011-0880-6 22068613 PMC11114951 243 Patrício P. Mateus-Pinheiro A. Sousa N. Pinto L. Re-cycling paradigms: cell cycle regulation in adult hippocampal neurogenesis and implications for depression. Mol. Neurobiol. 2013 48 1 84 96 10.1007/s12035-013-8422-x 23471746 PMC3718990 244 Cheffer A. Tárnok A. Ulrich H. Cell cycle regulation during neurogenesis in the embryonic and adult brain. Stem Cell Rev. 2013 9 6 794 805 10.1007/s12015-013-9460-5 23900682 245 Hindley C. Philpott A. Co-ordination of cell cycle and differentiation in the developing nervous system. Biochem. J. 2012 444 3 375 382 10.1042/BJ20112040 22642576 PMC3365434 246 Obernier K. Tong C.K. Alvarez-Buylla A. Restricted nature of adult neural stem cells: re-evaluation of their potential for brain repair. Front. Neurosci. 2014 8 162 10.3389/fnins.2014.00162 24987325 PMC4060730 247 Giachino C. Taylor V. Notching up neural stem cell homogeneity in homeostasis and disease. Front. Neurosci. 2014 8 32 10.3389/fnins.2014.00032 24611040 PMC3933793 248 Bragado Alonso S. Schulze-Steikow M. Calegari F. Cell cycle activity of neural precursors in the diseased mammalian brain. Front. Neurosci. 2014 8 39 10.3389/fnins.2014.00039 24578681 PMC3936187 249 Demir O. Singh S. Klimaschewski L. Aksan Kurnaz I. From birth till death: neurogenesis, cell cycle, and neurodegeneration. Anat. Rec. (Hoboken) 2009 292 12 1953 1961 10.1002/ar.20980 19943348 250 Qu J. Rizak J.D. Li X. Li J. Ma Y. Melatonin treatment increases the transcription of cell proliferation-related genes prior to inducing cell death in C6 glioma cells in vitro. Oncol. Lett. 2013 6 2 347 352 10.3892/ol.2013.1413 24137328 PMC3789011 251 Song J. Kang S.M. Lee K.M. Lee J.E. The protective effect of melatonin on neural stem cell against LPS-induced inflammation. BioMed Res. Int. 2015 2015 1 13 10.1155/2015/854359 25705693 PMC4331478 252 Estivill-Torrús G. Vitalis T. Fernández-Llebrez P. Price D.J. The transcription factor Pax6 is required for development of the diencephalic dorsal midline secretory radial glia that form the subcommissural organ. Mech. Dev. 2001 109 2 215 224 10.1016/S0925-4773(01)00527-5 11731235 253 Rath M.F. Bailey M.J. Kim J.S. Ho A.K. Gaildrat P. Coon S.L. Møller M. Klein D.C. Coon S.L. Møller M. Klein D.C. Developmental and diurnal dynamics of Pax4 expression in the mammalian pineal gland: nocturnal down-regulation is mediated by adrenergic-cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate signaling. Endocrinology 2009 150 2 803 811 10.1210/en.2008-0882 18818287 PMC2646524 254 Olmeda D. Castel S. Vilaró S. Cano A. Beta-catenin regulation during the cell cycle: implications in G2/M and apoptosis. Mol. Biol. Cell 2003 14 7 2844 2860 10.1091/mbc.e03-01-0865 12857869 PMC165681 255 He P. Shen Y. Interruption of β-catenin signaling reduces neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 2009 29 20 6545 6557 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0421-09.2009 19458225 PMC3618977 256 Jeong J.K. Lee J.H. Moon J.H. Lee Y.J. Park S.Y. Melatonin-mediated β -catenin activation protects neuron cells against prion protein-induced neurotoxicity. J. Pineal Res. 2014 57 4 427 434 10.1111/jpi.12182 25251028 257 Medrano S. Burns-Cusato M. Atienza M.B. Rahimi D. Scrable H. Regenerative capacity of neural precursors in the adult mammalian brain is under the control of p53. Neurobiol. Aging 2009 30 3 483 497 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.07.016 17850928 PMC2662499 258 Singhakumar R. Boontem P. Ekthuwapranee K. Sotthibundhu A. Mukda S. Chetsawang B. Govitrapong P. Melatonin attenuates methamphetamine-induced inhibition of neurogenesis in the adult mouse hippocampus: An in vivo study. Neurosci. Lett. 2015 606 209 214 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.09.011 26366944 259 Stoll E.A. Habibi B.A. Mikheev A.M. Lasiene J. Massey S.C. Swanson K.R. Rostomily R.C. Horner P.J. Increased re-entry into cell cycle mitigates age-related neurogenic decline in the murine subventricular zone. Stem Cells 2011 29 12 2005 2017 10.1002/stem.747 21948688 PMC3366556 260 Vasanthan J. Gurusamy N. Rajasingh S. Sigamani V. Kirankumar S. Thomas E.L. Rajasingh J. Role of human mesenchymal stem cells in regenerative therapy. Cells 2020 10 1 54 10.3390/cells10010054 33396426 PMC7823630 261 Zhou L. Chen X. Liu T. Gong Y. Chen S. Pan G. Cui W. Luo Z.P. Pei M. Yang H. He F. Melatonin reverses H 2 O 2 -induced premature senescence in mesenchymal stem cells via the SIRT1-dependent pathway. J. Pineal Res. 2015 59 2 190 205 10.1111/jpi.12250 25975679 PMC4523475 262 New D.C. Wong Y.H. Molecular mechanisms mediating the G protein-coupled receptor regulation of cell cycle progression. J. Mol. Signal. 2007 2 2 10.1186/1750-2187-2-2 17319972 PMC1808056 263 Dubocovich M.L. Markowska M. Functional MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors in mammals. Endocr. J. 2005 27 2 101 110 10.1385/ENDO:27:2:101 16217123 264 Lee H.P. Kudo W. Zhu X. Smith M.A. Lee H. Early induction of c-Myc is associated with neuronal cell death. Neurosci. Lett. 2011 505 2 124 127 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.10.004 22005580 PMC3234683 265 Wei R. Zhao X. Hao H. Du W. Zhu H. Embryonic stem-like cells from rabbit blastocysts cultured with melatonin could differentiate into three germ layers in vitro and in vivo. Mol. Reprod. Dev. 2016 83 11 1003 1014 10.1002/mrd.22739 27649385 266 Liu Z. Gan L. Luo D. Sun C. Melatonin promotes circadian rhythm-induced proliferation through Clock/histone deacetylase 3/c-Myc interaction in mouse adipose tissue. J. Pineal Res. 2017 62 4 e12383 10.1111/jpi.12383 27987529 267 Lee H. Lee H.J. Jung J.H. Shin E.A. Kim S.H. Melatonin disturbs SUMOylation-mediated crosstalk between c-Myc and nestin via MT1 activation and promotes the sensitivity of paclitaxel in brain cancer stem cells. J. Pineal Res. 2018 65 2 e12496 10.1111/jpi.12496 29654697 268 Sears R. Nuckolls F. Haura E. Taya Y. Tamai K. Nevins J.R. Multiple Ras-dependent phosphorylation pathways regulate Myc protein stability. Genes Dev. 2000 14 19 2501 2514 10.1101/gad.836800 11018017 PMC316970 269 Gerdes J. Lemke H. Baisch H. Wacker H.H. Schwab U. Stein H. Cell cycle analysis of a cell proliferation-associated human nuclear antigen defined by the monoclonal antibody Ki-67. J. Immunol. 1984 133 4 1710 1715 10.4049/jimmunol.133.4.1710 6206131 270 Nagy Z. Esiri M.M. Smith A.D. Expression of cell division markers in the hippocampus in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative conditions. Acta Neuropathol. 1997 93 3 294 300 10.1007/s004010050617 9083562 271 Yoo D.Y. Kim W. Lee C.H. Shin B.N. Nam S.M. Choi J.H. Won M.H. Yoon Y.S. Hwang I.K. Melatonin improves d-galactose-induced aging effects on behavior, neurogenesis, and lipid peroxidation in the mouse dentate gyrus via increasing pCREB expression. J. Pineal Res. 2012 52 1 21 28 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2011.00912.x 21718363 272 Sotthibundhu A. Ekthuwapranee K. Govitrapong P. Comparison of melatonin with growth factors in promoting precursor cells proliferation in adult mouse subventricular zone. EXCLI J. 2016 15 829 841 10.17179/excli2016-606 28275319 PMC5341012 273 Xia D. Li W. Zhang L. Qian H. Yao S. Qi X. RNA interference-mediated knockdown of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) promotes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in B-cell lymphoma cells. Neoplasma 2014 62 5 523 532 10.4149/neo_2014_064 25030435 274 Yoon G. Lim Y.H. Jo D. Ryu J. Song J. Kim Y.K. Obesity-linked circular RNA circTshz2-2 regulates the neuronal cell cycle and spatial memory in the brain. Mol. Psychiatry 2021 26 11 6350 6364 10.1038/s41380-021-01303-x 34561612 PMC8760052 275 Permpoonputtana K. Tangweerasing P. Mukda S. Boontem P. Nopparat C. Govitrapong P. Long-term administration of melatonin attenuates neuroinflammation in the aged mouse brain. EXCLI J. 2018 17 634 646 10.17179/excli2017-654 30108467 PMC6088215 276 Mansouri S. Salari A.A. Abedi A. Mohammadi P. Amani M. Melatonin treatment improves cognitive deficits by altering inflammatory and neurotrophic factors in the hippocampus of obese mice. Physiol. Behav. 2022 254 113919 10.1016/j.physbeh.2022.113919 35858673 277 Sugiyama A. Kato H. Takakura H. Osawa S. Maeda Y. Izawa T. Effects of physical activity and melatonin on brain‐derived neurotrophic factor and cytokine expression in the cerebellum of high‐fat diet‐fed rats. Neuropsychopharmacol. Rep. 2020 40 3 291 296 10.1002/npr2.12125 32681810 PMC7722650 278 Shokri-Mashhadi N. Darand M. Rouhani M.H. Yahay M. Feltham B.A. Saraf-Bank S. Effects of melatonin supplementation on BDNF concentrations and depression: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Behav. Brain Res. 2023 436 114083 10.1016/j.bbr.2022.114083 36049659 279 Guzman-Marin R. Suntsova N. Bashir T. Nienhuis R. Szymusiak R. McGinty D. Rapid eye movement sleep deprivation contributes to reduction of neurogenesis in the hippocampal dentate gyrus of the adult rat. Sleep 2008 31 2 167 175 10.1093/sleep/31.2.167 18274263 PMC2225569 280 Tripathi S. Jha S.K. REM sleep deprivation alters learning-induced cell proliferation and generation of newborn young neurons in the dentate gyrus of the dorsal hippocampus. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2022 13 2 194 206 10.1021/acschemneuro.1c00465 34990120 281 Gobbi G. Comai S. Differential function of melatonin MT1 and MT2 receptors in REM and NREM sleep. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne) 2019 10 87 10.3389/fendo.2019.00087 30881340 PMC6407453 282 López-Armas G. Flores-Soto M.E. Chaparro-Huerta V. Jave-Suarez L.F. Soto-Rodríguez S. Rusanova I. Acuña-Castroviejo D. González-Perez O. González-Castañeda R.E. Prophylactic role of oral melatonin administration on neurogenesis in adult Balb/C mice during REM sleep deprivation. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2016 2016 1 10 10.1155/2016/2136902 27579149 PMC4992538 283 Kunz D. Stotz S. Bes F. Treatment of isolated REM sleep behavior disorder using melatonin as a chronobiotic. J. Pineal Res. 2021 71 2 e12759 10.1111/jpi.12759 34309908 284 Gilat M. Marshall N.S. Testelmans D. Buyse B. Lewis S.J.G. A critical review of the pharmacological treatment of REM sleep behavior disorder in adults: time for more and larger randomized placebo-controlled trials. J. Neurol. 2022 269 1 125 148 10.1007/s00415-020-10353-0 33410930 PMC8739295 285 Pérez-Lloret S. Cardinali D.P. Melatonin as a chronobiotic and cytoprotective agent in Parkinson’s disease. Front. Pharmacol. 2021 12 650597 10.3389/fphar.2021.650597 33935759 PMC8082390 286 Galbiati A. Carli G. Hensley M. Ferini-Strambi L. REM sleep behaviour disorder and Alzheimer’s disease: Definitely no relationship? J. Alzheimers Dis. 2018 63 1 1 11 10.3233/JAD-171164 29578489 287 Mueller A.D. Meerlo P. McGinty D. Mistlberger R.E. Sleep and adult neurogenesis: implications for cognition and mood. Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci. 2013 25 151 181 10.1007/7854_2013_251 24218292 288 Meerlo P. Mistlberger R.E. Jacobs B.L. Craig Heller H. McGinty D. New neurons in the adult brain: The role of sleep and consequences of sleep loss. Sleep Med. Rev. 2009 13 3 187 194 10.1016/j.smrv.2008.07.004 18848476 PMC2771197 289 Guzman-Marin R. Suntsova N. Methippara M. Greiffenstein R. Szymusiak R. McGinty D. Sleep deprivation suppresses neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus of rats. Eur. J. Neurosci. 2005 22 8 2111 2116 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04376.x 16262649 290 Kreutzmann J.C. Havekes R. Abel T. Meerlo P. Sleep deprivation and hippocampal vulnerability: changes in neuronal plasticity, neurogenesis and cognitive function. Neuroscience 2015 309 173 190 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.04.053 25937398 291 Zada D. Bronshtein I. Lerer-Goldshtein T. Garini Y. Appelbaum L. Sleep increases chromosome dynamics to enable reduction of accumulating DNA damage in single neurons. Nat. Commun. 2019 10 1 895 10.1038/s41467-019-08806-w 30837464 PMC6401120 292 Konopka A. Atkin J.D. The role of DNA damage in neural plasticity in physiology and neurodegeneration. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 2022 16 836885 10.3389/fncel.2022.836885 35813507 PMC9259845 293 Galano A. Tan D.X. Reiter R. Melatonin: A versatile protector against oxidative DNA damage. Molecules 2018 23 3 530 10.3390/molecules23030530 29495460 PMC6017920 294 Liu R. Fu A. Hoffman A.E. Zheng T. Zhu Y. Melatonin enhances DNA repair capacity possibly by affecting genes involved in DNA damage responsive pathways. BMC Cell Biol. 2013 14 1 1 10.1186/1471-2121-14-1 23294620 PMC3543845 295 Brzecka A. Leszek J. Ashraf G.M. Ejma M. Ávila-Rodriguez M.F. Yarla N.S. Tarasov V.V. Chubarev V.N. Samsonova A.N. Barreto G.E. Aliev G. Sleep disorders associated with Alzheimer’s disease: A perspective. Front. Neurosci. 2018 12 330 10.3389/fnins.2018.00330 29904334 PMC5990625 296 Reiter R.J. Sharma R. Rosales-Corral S. de Mange J. Phillips W.T. Tan D.X. Bitar R.D. Melatonin in ventricular and subarachnoid cerebrospinal fluid: Its function in the neural glymphatic network and biological significance for neurocognitive health. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2022 605 70 81 10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.03.025 35316766 297 Matsuoka T. Imai A. Fujimoto H. Kato Y. Shibata K. Nakamura K. Yokota H. Yamada K. Narumoto J. Neural correlates of sleep disturbance in Alzheimer’s disease: Role of the precuneus in sleep disturbance. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2018 63 3 957 964 10.3233/JAD-171169 29710710 PMC6004892 298 Zisapel N. New perspectives on the role of melatonin in human sleep, circadian rhythms and their regulation. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2018 175 16 3190 3199 10.1111/bph.14116 29318587 PMC6057895 299 Insel P.S. Mohlenhoff B.S. Neylan T.C. Krystal A.D. Mackin R.S. Association of sleep and β-amyloid pathology among older cognitively unimpaired adults. JAMA Netw. Open 2021 4 7 e2117573 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.17573 34297074 PMC8303100 300 Winer J.R. Mander B.A. Kumar S. Reed M. Baker S.L. Jagust W.J. Walker M.P. Sleep disturbance forecasts β-amyloid accumulation across subsequent years. Curr. Biol. 2020 30 21 4291 4298.e3 10.1016/j.cub.2020.08.017 32888482 PMC7642104 301 Sadeghmousavi S. Eskian M. Rahmani F. Rezaei N. The effect of insomnia on development of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinflammation 2020 17 1 289 10.1186/s12974-020-01960-9 33023629 PMC7542374 302 Ferracioli-Oda E. Qawasmi A. Bloch M.H. Meta-analysis: melatonin for the treatment of primary sleep disorders. PLoS One 2013 8 5 e63773 10.1371/journal.pone.0063773 23691095 PMC3656905 303 Espinar A. García-Oliva A. Isorna E.M. Quesada A. Prada F.A. Guerrero J.M. Neuroprotection by melatonin from glutamate-induced excitotoxicity during development of the cerebellum in the chick embryo. J. Pineal Res. 2000 28 2 81 88 10.1034/j.1600-079X.2001.280203.x 10709969 304 Wongchitrat P. Lansubsakul N. Kamsrijai U. Sae-Ung K. Mukda S. Govitrapong P. Melatonin attenuates the high-fat diet and streptozotocin-induced reduction in rat hippocampal neurogenesis. Neurochem. Int. 2016 100 97 109 10.1016/j.neuint.2016.09.006 27620814 305 Baka M. Uyanikgil Y. Ateş U. Kültürsay N. Investigation of maternal melatonin effect on the hippocampal formation of newborn rat model of intrauterine cortical dysplasia. Childs Nerv. Syst. 2010 26 11 1575 1581 10.1007/s00381-010-1147-5 20461523 306 Borre Y.E. Panagaki T. Koelink P.J. Morgan M.E. Hendriksen H. Garssen J. Kraneveld A.D. Olivier B. Oosting R.S. Neuroprotective and cognitive enhancing effects of a multi-targeted food intervention in an animal model of neurodegeneration and depression. Neuropharmacology 2014 79 738 749 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.11.009 24286859 307 Sampaio L.F.S. Melatonin inhibitory effect on cAMP accumulation in the chick retina development. Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 2008 26 3-4 277 282 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2008.02.001 18343081 308 Miranda-Riestra A. Estrada-Reyes R. Torres-Sanchez E.D. Carreño-García S. Ortiz G.G. Benítez-King G. Melatonin: A neurotrophic factor? Molecules 2022 27 22 7742 10.3390/molecules27227742 36431847 PMC9698771 309 Boldrini M. Butt T.H. Santiago A.N. Tamir H. Dwork A.J. Rosoklija G.B. Arango V. Hen R. Mann J.J. Benzodiazepines and the potential trophic effect of antidepressants on dentate gyrus cells in mood disorders. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014 17 12 1923 1933 10.1017/S1461145714000844 24969726 PMC4374628 310 Penninkilampi R. Eslick G.D. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the risk of dementia associated with benzodiazepine use, after controlling for protopathic bias. CNS Drugs 2018 32 6 485 497 10.1007/s40263-018-0535-3 29926372 311 Chen J. Cai F. Cao J. Zhang X. Li S. Long-term antiepileptic drug administration during early life inhibits hippocampal neurogenesis in the developing brain. J. Neurosci. Res. 2009 87 13 2898 2907 10.1002/jnr.22125 19437554 312 Zhao Y. Wang Z. Dai J. Chen L. Huang Y. Zhan Z. Beneficial effects of benzodiazepine diazepam on chronic stress-induced impairment of hippocampal structural plasticity and depression-like behavior in mice. Behav. Brain Res. 2012 228 2 339 350 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.12.013 22198054 313 Ikezaki K. Black K.L. Stimulation of cell growth and DNA synthesis by peripheral benzodiazepine. Cancer Lett. 1990 49 2 115 120 10.1016/0304-3835(90)90146-O 2155058 314 Cos S. Fernández F. Sánchez-Barceló E.J. Melatonin inhibits dna synthesis in mcf-7 human breast cancer cells in vitro. Life Sci. 1996 58 26 2447 2453 10.1016/0024-3205(96)00249-4 8691990 315 Griffin C.E. III Kaye A.M. Bueno F.R. Kaye A.D. Benzodiazepine pharmacology and central nervous system-mediated effects. Ochsner J. 2013 13 2 214 223 23789008 PMC3684331 316 Rogers N.L. Kennaway D.J. Dawson D. Neurobehavioural performance effects of daytime melatonin and temazepam administration. J. Sleep Res. 2003 12 3 207 212 10.1046/j.1365-2869.2003.00360.x 12941059 317 Clay E. Falissard B. Moore N. Toumi M. Contribution of prolonged-release melatonin and anti-benzodiazepine campaigns to the reduction of benzodiazepine and z-drugs consumption in nine European countries. Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 2013 69 4 1 10 10.1007/s00228-012-1424-1 23114457 PMC3610030 318 Ghaeli P. Solduzian M. Vejdani S. Talasaz A.H. Comparison of the effects of melatonin and oxazepam on anxiety levels and sleep quality in patients with ST-Segment-Elevation myocardial infarction following primary percutaneous coronary intervention: a randomized clinical trial. Ann. Pharmacother. 2018 52 10 949 955 10.1177/1060028018776608 29749262 Fig. (1) Role of melatonin in regulating circadian synchronization, cell cycle machinery and neurogenesis. The zeitgeber-like light synchronizes the daily rhythms that are generated in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) located in the hypothalamus. Melatonin plays a major role in peripheral clock synchronization by controlling clock genes and circadian rhythm. On the one hand, the molecular clock in the melatonin-producing cells of the pineal gland plays a key role in regulating the expression of cell cycle regulator genes, including cyclins, CDKs, CKIs, as well as checkpoint protein encoding genes, thereby preventing cell cycle re-entry-mediated apoptosis and degeneration. On the other hand, melatonin regulates time-dependent diurnal processes of cell proliferation and differentiation by augmenting the levels of stem cell markers, thus maintaining a homeostatic balance in the adult neurogenic niches. Fig. (2) Schematic representation of the signalling pathways involved in melatonin-dependent regulation of the cell cycle, apoptosis and Aβ/tau pathologies. Alteration in the levels of cell cycle regulators results in aberrant cell cycle re-entry and subsequent apoptosis, contributing to AD progression. Melatonin, through its binding to the plasma membrane-located G-protein-coupled MT1 and MT2 receptors, coordinates and balances the cell cycle regulators (cyclins, CDKs, CKIs, E2F-1, Rb, and PCNA) involved in functions such as neuronal migration, neuronal maturation, and synaptic plasticity and regulates neuronal cell cycle checkpoint proteins ( a ). Moreover, melatonin controls the expression of DNA damage response genes and significantly prevents DNA damage-induced apoptosis via a sirtuin-dependent ATM/ATR/MDM4 and p53/p21 inhibition ( b ). Melatonin also has an important role in repressing several factors promoting cell cycle re-entry-dependent apoptosis (C-Myc expression, caspase activity, DYRK1-mediated cyclin D1/p21 levels and calpain-dependent conversion of p35 into p25) and in promoting Sox2 expression, which alleviates this phenomenon ( c ). In parallel, melatonin, by inhibiting DYRK1, p75NTR and by increasing Cdk5 activity via p25, is lessening βAPP and Tau hyperphosphorylation ( d ). In addition, melatonin, via its impact on βAPP processing (inhibition of β- and γ-secretases and activation of α-secretase as well as stimulation of the Sirt1/FOXO1 pathway), modulates Aβ production and promotes sAPPα-induced neuroprotection and neurogenesis ( e ). Finally and interestingly, melatonin, via its capability to inhibit calpain activity and the subsequent formation of the Cdk5/p25 hyperactive complex, has a triple beneficial effect by preventing cell cycle re-entry-dependent apoptosis ( c ), Cdk5/p25-dependent Tau hyperphosphorylation ( d ) and Cdk5/p25-mediated β-secretase activation and Aβ production ( e ). Overall, these multiple melatonin-induced beneficial effects altogether lead to a decrease in cell cycle re-entry-dependent apoptosis and Aβ and Tau pathologies as well as to an increase in neurogenesis and potentially represent a valuable way to thwart Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. Table 1 The factors targeted by melatonin to harmonize the cell cycle (reference are listed in order of appearance in the text). Dose Duration Model Effect References 1 μM 12 h (pre incub) Aβ 42 -stressed &amp; H 2 O 2 -stressed human neuroblastoma cells ↘ p75NTR protein &amp; mRNA levels [ 142 ] [ 143 ] 1 mM 10 mg/kg/d 12 h (with MPP + ) 9 m MPP + -treated rat cerebellar granule cells 1 month-old SAMP8 mice ↘ Cdk5 protein levels [ 154 ] [ 156 ] 1 mM 10 mg/kg/d 12 h (with MPP + ) 9 m MPP + -treated rat cerebellar granule cells 1 month-old SAMP8 mice ↘ p35 ➬ p25 conversion [ 154 ] [ 156 ] 1 mg/kg/d &amp; 0.1 mg/kg/d 7 d Haloperidol-treated 5 month old rats ↘ Cdk5 activity in hippocampus and cerebral cortex [ 155 ] 1 nM 4 mM 1 mM 24 h (with E 2 ) 4-48 h 24-48 h Estrogen-treated human mammary adenocarcinoma cells Human osteosarcoma cells Human osteoblastic cells ↘ Cyclin D1 transcription &amp; protein levels [ 157 ] [ 158 ] [ 161 ] 4 mM 1 mM 4-48 h 24-48 h Human osteosarcoma cells Human osteoblastic cells ↘ Cyclin B1 protein &amp; mRNA levels [ 158 ] [ 161 ] 4 mM 1 mM 24-48 h 4-48 h Human osteosarcoma cells Human osteoblastic cells ↘ Cdk4 protein &amp; mRNA levels [ 158 ] [ 161 ] 4 mM 1 mM 4-48 h 24-48 h Human osteosarcoma cells Human osteoblastic cells ↘ Cdk1 protein &amp; mRNA levels [ 158 ] [ 161 ] 250 μM 1 h pre incub + 24 h with DEX Dexamethasone-treated human neuroblastoma cells ↘ Calpain activity &amp; protein levels [ 160 ] 250 μM 1 h pre incub + 24 h with DEX Dexamethasone-treated human neuroblastoma cells ↘ Calpastatin protein levels [ 160 ] 250 μM 20 mg/kg/d 15 d 14 d (with ATR) Aged rat cerebellar granule neurons Splenocytes of atrazine-treated mice ↘ E2F-1 protein levels [ 136 ] [ 170 ] 0.25-4 mM 1 h (during activation) Activated mouse CD4 + T cells ↘ NFATs activation (de-phosphorylation) [ 173 ] 10-100 μg/ml 24 h VBGP rat chondrocytes ↘ PCNA protein levels [ 180 ] 1 mM 3 h (with Eto) Etoposide-treated mouse oocytes ↘ ATM activation (phosphorylation) [ 182 ] 10 mg/kg 3 d/week 6 w (just before BPA) Cerebral neurons of bisphenol-A-treated rats ↘ p53 expression levels [ 187 ] 10 mg/kg/d 1 μM 6 m (from 16 to 22 m) 24h Aged mice Aged human periodontal ligament stem cells ↘ p53 protein &amp; mRNA levels ↘ p53 protein levels [ 191 ] [ 212 ] 1-10 mg/d 4 w Aged SAMP8 mice ↗ FoxO3A mRNA levels [ 190 ] 10 mg/kg/d 6 m (from 16 to 22 m) Aged mice ↗ FoxO1 mRNA levels [ 191 ] 8 mg/kg/d 21 d (9 d before 5-FU + 12 d with 5-FU) Hippocampus of 5-fluorouracil-treated rats ↘ p21 positive cells [ 211 ] 1 μM 24 h Aged human periodontal ligament stem cells ↘ p21 protein levels [ 212 ] 3 mM 60 min (before H 2 O 2 ) H 2 O 2 -treated rat hepatoma cells ↘ Ras activation (Ras-GTP levels) [ 214 ] 0.01-1 μM 1 h pre incub + 24 h with Aβ 42 Aβ 42 -treated human neuroblastoma cells ↘ APP-BP1 protein levels [ 223 ] 0.1 μM 1 h pre incub + 24 h with Aβ 42 Aβ 42 -treated human neuroblastoma cells ↘ alteration of NEDD8 cellular localization [ 223 ] Abbreviations: 5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; Aβ, amyloid beta; APP-BP1, amyloid precursor protein-binding protein 1; ATM, ataxia telangiectasia mutated; ATR, atrazine; BPA, bisphenol-A; Cdk, cyclin-dependent kinase; d, day; DEX, dexamethasone; E 2 , estradiol; Eto, etoposide; Fox, forkhead box; GTP, guanosine-5'-triphosphate; h, hour; m, month; min, minute; MPP + , 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium; NEDD, neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated; NFAT, Nuclear factor of activated T-cells; p75NTR, p75 neurotrophin receptor; PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear antigen; Ras, rat sarcoma virus; SAMP, senescence accelerated mouse-prone; VBGP, vertebral body growth plate; w, week. Table 2 The factors targeted by melatonin to promote adult neurogenesis (reference are listed in order of appearance in the text). Dose Duration Model Effect References 8 mg/kg/d 3 mg/kg/d (d1-d3) 5 mg/kg/d (d4-d3) 10 mg/kg/d (d6-d7) 6 mg/L (amount/d NI) 21 d (9 d before 5-FU + 12 d with 5-FU) 7 d 3 w (7 w after D-gal) Hippocampus of 5-fluorouracil-treated rats Adult mouse hippocampus Dentate gyrus of D-gal-treated mice ↗ DCX protein levels [ 211 ] [ 258 ] [ 271 ] 8 mg/kg/d 10 mg/kg/d 10 mg/kg/d 5 mg/kg/d 21 d (9 d before 5-FU + 12 d with 5-FU) 6 m (16 to 22 m old) 8 w 9 w + exercise training Hippocampus of 5-fluorouracil-treated rats Hippocampus and prefrontal cortex of aged mice Hippocampus of non-obese and obese mice Cerebellum of high-fat diet-fed rats ↗ BDNF protein levels [ 211 ] [ 275 ] [ 276 ] [ 277 ] 1-3 mM 100 nM 24 h 2-3 d C6 glioma cells Mouse neural stem cells ↗ Sox2 mRNA levels [ 250 ] [ 251 ] 1-4 μM 24 h Human neuroblastoma cells ↗ β-catenin protein levels [ 256 ] 3-5 mM 3 mg/kg/d (d1-d3) 5 mg/kg/d (d4-d3) 10 mg/kg/d (d6-d7) 24 h 7 d C6 glioma cells Adult mouse hippocampus ↗ Nestin mRNA levels ↗ Nestin protein levels [ 250 ] [ 258 ] 3 mg/kg/d (d1-d3) 5 mg/kg/d (d4-d3) 10 mg/kg/d (d6-d7) 7 d Adult mouse hippocampus ↗ β3-tubulin protein levels [ 258 ] 10 nM-100μM 4 d H 2 O 2 -treated human mesenchymal stem cells ↗ SIRT1 mRNA levels [ 261 ] 6 mg/L (amount/d NI) 3 w (7 w after D-gal) Dentate gyrus of D-gal-treated mice ↗ Ki67 protein levels [ 271 ] Abbreviations: 5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; d, day; DCX, doublecortin; D-gal, D-galactose; h, hour; L, liter; m, month; NI, non indicated; SIRT1, sirtuin 1; Sox2, SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 2; w, week.