pmc Alzheimers Dement Alzheimers Dement 4549 alzdem ALZ Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia 1552-5260 1552-5279 Wiley PMC12603797 PMC12603797.1 12603797 12603797 41216912 10.1002/alz.70835 ALZ70835 1 Review Article Review Article Tracking electrophysiological signatures of Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review of multimodal studies SOHRABPOUR et al. Sohrabpour Abbas https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5442-9177 1 2 asohrabpour@mgh.harvard.edu Sarovic Darko https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9302-4890 1 2 3 4 Zetterberg Henrik https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3930-4354 5 6 7 8 9 10 Hämäläinen Matti S. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6841-112X 11 Baillet Sylvain https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6762-5713 12 13 14 sylvain.baillet@mcgill.ca Khan Sheraz https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6792-3577 1 2 skhan7@mgh.harvard.edu 1 Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging Massachusetts General Hospital Charlestown Massachusetts USA 2 Department of Radiology Harvard Medical School Massachusetts General Hospital Boston Massachusetts USA 3 Department of Radiology Sahlgrenska University Hospital Gothenburg Sweden 4 Department of Radiology Institute of Clinical Sciences, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg Gothenburg Sweden 5 Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg Mölndal Sweden 6 Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory Sahlgrenska University Hospital Mölndal Sweden 7 Department of Neurodegenerative Disease UCL Institute of Neurology Queen Square London UK 8 UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL London UK 9 Hong Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases InnoHK Hong Kong China 10 Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health University of Wisconsin‐Madison Madison Wisconsin USA 11 Department of Neuroscience and Biomedical Engineering Aalto University School of Science Espoo Finland 12 Montreal Neurological Institute McGill University Montreal Quebec Canada 13 Department of Neuroscience University of Montreal Montreal Quebec Canada 14 CRCHUM, Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal Montreal Quebec Canada * Correspondence Abbas Sohrabpour, Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. Email: asohrabpour@mgh.harvard.edu Sylvain Baillet, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada. Email: sylvain.baillet@mcgill.ca Sheraz Khan, Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. Email: skhan7@mgh.harvard.edu 11 11 2025 11 2025 21 11 499789 10.1002/alz.v21.11 e70835 28 9 2025 06 5 2025 29 9 2025 11 11 2025 12 11 2025 12 11 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's Association. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes. Abstract We conducted a review of the electrophysiological manifestations of Alzheimer's disease (AD) as captured by electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG), with a focus on tracking their evolution through disease progression. To link electrophysiological features to the underlying neurobiology of AD, we prioritized studies that integrated EEG/MEG with other data modalities, such as positron emission tomography (PET) imaging and/or fluid biomarkers (cerebrospinal fluid [CSF] or blood/plasma) of amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau. Our analysis contextualizes these findings within current mechanistic hypotheses of AD pathophysiology. A key highlight of the present review is that electrophysiological changes along the AD disease progression may follow a non‐monotonic trajectory, underscoring a need for caution when developing biomarkers for early detection or staging the disease with non‐invasive electrophysiology. We also discuss outstanding challenges in the interplay between AD pathology and electrophysiological dynamics. This review highlights the potential of multimodal approaches to refining our understanding of AD and improving its early diagnosis. Highlights A systematic review of electrophysiological signatures of AD in multimodal studies. Existing findings are contextualized with AD pathophysiology and neurobiology. Electrophysiological signatures of AD evolve in a dynamic, non‐linear fashion. α oscillations show a non‐monotonous behavior in different stages of AD progression. EEG/MEG biomarkers hold significant promise for the early detection/monitoring of AD. Alzheimer's disease amyloid beta cross‐modal measurements electroencephalogram electrophysiology magnetoencephalogram neuropsychological assessment resting state tau protein The David Cohen (DC) Biomagnetism Felloship The Swedish Research Council 2023‐00356 2022‐01018 2019‐02397 The European Union's Horizon 101053962 Swedish State Support for Clinical Research ALFGBG‐71320 The Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation 201809‐2016862 Cure Alzheimer's Fund 10.13039/100007625 Olav Thon Foundation The Erling‐Persson Family Foundation FO2022‐0270 UK Dementia Research Institute 10.13039/501100017510 UKDRI‐1003 National Institutes of Health 10.13039/100000002 R01NS104585 R01EB026299‐05 CIHR Canada Research Chair of Neural Dynamics of Brain Systems CRC‐2017‐00311 Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada 10.13039/501100000038 436355‐13 Canadian Institutes of Health Research 10.13039/501100000024 202503PJT‐542788 Canada Brain Research Fund (CBRF) Alzheimer's Association 10.13039/100000957 Brain Canada 10.13039/100009408 The Swedish Brain Foundation PS2023‐0041 pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY-NC source-schema-version-number 2.0 cover-date November 2025 details-of-publishers-convertor Converter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.6.6 mode:remove_FC converted:11.11.2025 Sohrabpour A , Sarovic D , Zetterberg H , Hämäläinen MS , Baillet S , Khan S . Tracking electrophysiological signatures of Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review of multimodal studies . Alzheimer's Dement . 2025 ; 21 : e70835 . 10.1002/alz.70835 Sylvain Baillet and Sheraz Khan contributed equally to this study and are co‐senior authors. 1 INTRODUCTION Advances in medical sciences and healthcare access have significantly increased human life expectancy. However, this progress is accompanied by a grimmer challenge: the rising prevalence of age‐related neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). AD is projected to affect 131.5 million people worldwide by 2050, 1 with an estimated global economic burden of $9.1 trillion, $1.5 trillion in the US alone. 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 Identifying risk factors, underlying mechanisms, biomarkers, and treatment strategies is therefore of paramount importance to enable early intervention and slow disease progression. In this review, 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 we examine the non‐invasive electrophysiological signatures of AD, as measured by resting‐state magnetoencephalography (MEG) 56 and electroencephalography (EEG). 1.1 Alzheimer's disease – definition AD is best understood as a spectrum disorder, where symptoms and biomarkers vary in intensity across disease stages. Pathological changes are presently thought to begin decades before clinical symptoms emerge, making early detection crucial 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 for effective interventions. In the preclinical phase, patients exhibit little to no cognitive impairment, yet initially amyloid beta (Aβ) and subsequently tau proteins gradually accumulate in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood/plasma. 60 As proteins start to deposit in the cortex, Aβ protein levels drop in the CSF/plasma. 61 As the disease progresses, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) develops, with increased levels of Aβ and tau in the nervous system. At later stages, neurodegeneration accelerates and severe cognitive symptoms manifest, with structural atrophy becoming detectable with MRI 62 , 63 and metabolic decline revealed by fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET scans. 64 In the most advanced stages, patients experience severe cognitive and functional deficits, eventually leading to dementia. 59 , 60 Ultimately, a definitive diagnosis of AD can only be confirmed postmortem, through the neuropathological detection of tau neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and amyloid plaques. 65 1.2 AD biomarkers – diagnosis and staging There has been a pronounced shift away from syndrome‐based diagnostic approaches toward a biologically driven classification of AD. 60 , 65 In 2024, the Alzheimer's Association (AA) proposed a revised diagnosis and staging system for AD, 60 emphasizing neurobiology and proteinopathy as measured by biofluid and imaging biomarkers. According to this framework, Aβ pathology (detected via amyloid PET or biofluid markers such as CSF/plasma Aβ42/Aβ40) is a necessary condition for an AD diagnosis. As the disease progresses, tau pathology (measured by tau PET or biofluid markers such as tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 and 217 [p‐tau181, p‐tau217] and MTBR‐tau243) accelerates, correlating with cognitive decline. 60 Staging AD, biologically, requires assessing both Aβ‐related biomarkers and tau deposition across brain regions. Tau PET imaging can distinguish between protein deposition distribution in the mesial temporal and neocortical structures, further refining disease staging to better align biological measures with clinical symptomatology. However, this biologically based framework presents significant challenges: the limited accessibility to advanced PET imaging, the invasive nature of PET and CSF‐based measurements, and the high cost of these investigations. Plasma biomarkers offer a less invasive alternative and have shown promise in detecting cerebral Aβ pathology, particularly via Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio. The literature strongly indicates that a lower Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio is correlated with raised levels of cortical Aβ load and increased risk of dementia and cognitive decline. 66 However, small‐fold variations between Aβ‐positive and Aβ‐negative individuals, leading to overlapping results across study samples, and the need for advanced assay techniques (e.g., mass spectrometry, which outperforms immunoassays but is less accessible) 67 still challenge the deployment of plasma biomarkers on a massive clinical scale. Notably, the newly discovered plasma p‐tau markers reflect Aβ pathology, since phosphorylation and subsequent tau accumulation are downstream effects of Aβ‐related pathology. 67 Even though there are still some barriers for large‐scale adoption of plasma biomarkers in clinical practice, the measurement of Aβ levels in biofluids (CSF and plasma) is presently the most sensitive biomarker for assessing the likelihood of AD and monitoring progression 60 , 64 and most likely will continue to be so in the near future. However, fluid biomarkers are presently not measured preemptively as part of routine clinical workups; they are prescribed after the onset of cognitive impairments are reported by patients themselves or their family and confirmed by neuropsychological assessment (NPA). 58 , 68 Furthermore, with the growing emphasis on biological rather than symptom‐based AD staging, it is critical to continue to explore the underlying neurobiological mechanisms of AD pathology. There is therefore a need for novel non‐invasive and cost‐effective biomarkers to enable the early screening and repeated monitoring of older individuals before symptoms start to manifest and as more drug therapies against AD become available and are administered. 59 , 60 Such biomarkers would enable the early delivery of intervention strategies 69 to slow or halt disease progression, improve the quality of life of patients and their family, reduce the economic burden of AD, 2 , 70 monitor treatment efficacy, and, by directly measuring the neurophysiological manifestations of pathology, inform the development of novel therapeutic pathways. Non‐invasive electrophysiological measures of brain activity with EEG and MEG have demonstrated sensitivity to AD‐related changes 61 , 71 and have potential to meet these criteria for clinical use. 72 , 73 While EEG is widely accessible, new sensing technologies for MEG, such as optically pumped magnetometers (OPMs), 74 , 75 , 76 are currently improving access to MEG for both research and clinical purposes. The next section will review prevailing hypotheses on AD pathophysiology and its relationship to electrophysiological changes and AD biomarkers. 1.3 Brief outline of AD mechanisms Current hypotheses, based on both animal models and human studies, suggest that AD progresses through a cascade of neurobiological events, often referred to as the Aβ/tau cascade. 61 , 77 According to this hypothesis, the initial event in AD pathology is the accumulation of soluble Aβ oligomers (AβOs), which are highly toxic compared to their fibrillar counterparts. These oligomers accumulate near dendritic spines, leading to pathological activation of N‐methyl‐D‐aspartate (NMDA) receptors. This, in turn, recruits Fyn kinase by tau proteins, triggering excitotoxicity, synaptic protein loss (e.g., neurogranin), and synaptic dysfunction, which can be imaged with PET. 61 As Aβ levels increase, oxidative stress is exacerbated, ultimately leading to tau hyperphosphorylation. Hyperphosphorylated tau dissociates from microtubules, destabilizing the cytoskeletal network. Oligomeric and soluble tau forms – not necessarily fibrillar tangles – are now considered the primary toxic agents. 77 This disruption impairs intracellular transport, particularly mitochondrial trafficking, thereby intensifying oxidative stress and perpetuating a cycle of neural dysfunction, synaptic degeneration, and cell death. As the disease progresses, NFTs form, marking widespread neurodegeneration. 61 , 77 Consistent with the cascade hypothesis, CSF Aβ42 levels initially increase in MCI and early‐AD individuals, during the presymptomatic stage of the disease, before declining likely due to the sequestration of the protein in growing Aβ plaques in the brain parenchyma. 61 A similar, but less well‐characterized, trajectory has been suggested for CSF tau levels. 28 Eventually, Aβ and tau deposition plateaus in the cortex, 58 , 60 , 78 leading to neuronal loss, cognitive decline, and glucose hypometabolism, 34 as detected with FDG PET imaging. These neurobiological changes are associated with electrophysiological properties of brain circuits, detectable non‐invasively and at early stages of AD evolution. 9 , 10 , 28 , 34 , 43 A growing body of evidence suggests early‐stage AD is characterized by neuronal hyperexcitability, potentially as a compensatory mechanism before widespread neurodegeneration. This hyperactivity, driven by excitotoxicity and disinhibition, is reflected in the α frequency band (8 to 12 Hz). 77 , 79 , 80 , 81 One key mechanism underlying this hyperexcitability is the dysregulation of the excitatory/inhibitory (E/I) balance. Specifically, Aβ pathology appears to preferentially affect inhibitory interneurons, leading to disinhibition and excessive cortical excitability. 21 Notably, GABAergic terminals are reduced in the vicinity of Aβ plaques, contributing to further E/I imbalance. 82 As tau pathology accelerates, this initial hyperactivity transitions into hypoactivity, correlating with progressive neuronal loss and network degradation. 9 , 11 , 83 Functional MRI (fMRI) studies of Aβ‐positive individuals lends further support to this hypothesis, indicating early hyperactivity in the default mode network (DMN), later declining as tau pathology advances. 84 As tau pathology progresses, long‐range synchrony and connectivity weaken, potentially impairing top‐down cognitive control and memory processing. This aligns with observations that tau burden is more closely linked to cognitive decline than Aβ burden. 18 The cholinergic system, crucial for cognitive function, is also disrupted early in AD. Aβ accumulation reduces acetylcholine synthesis and disrupts cholinergic efficiency, which may contribute to the increase in low‐frequency EEG activity ( δ / θ bands). 85 , 86 , 87 Since α oscillations are involved in wakefulness regulation, tau pathology's impact on wake‐promoting neurons 88 may have implications for AD‐related sleep disturbances. 89 , 90 , 91 In summary, emerging evidence supports the amyloid hypothesis as a central mechanism driving AD pathology, 60 , 68 , 92 while acknowledging possible alternative mechanisms models. 68 , 79 , 92 , 93 Understanding the interplay between Aβ deposition, tau pathology, synaptic dysfunction, and electrophysiological alterations is essential for refining early AD detection strategies and targeted interventions. 1.4 Electrophysiological features as AD biomakers Electrophysiological signals manifest neurobiological changes in AD, reflecting disease dynamics from its earliest stages. 94 , 95 , 96 A hallmark electrophysiological feature of AD is spectral slowing, characterized by increased power in low‐frequency oscillations ( δ [1 to 4 Hz] and θ [4 to 8 Hz] bands), 85 , 86 , 87 reduced power in high‐frequency oscillations ( α and β [15 to 25 Hz] bands), a progressive shift toward slower frequency activity. 97 Interestingly, low‐frequency oscillation changes ( δ / θ ) appear to correlate more closely with Aβ pathology, 14 while α and β frequency alterations are associated with both Aβ and tau pathology. This suggests a distinct temporal and mechanistic relationship between electrophysiological changes and underlying AD pathology. This sensitivity, combined with non‐invasiveness, accessibility, and relative low cost, has generated significant interest in developing electrophysiological biomarkers of AD. In particular, the field has seen a surge in machine learning (ML)‐based approaches aimed at classifying individuals into healthy controls (HC), subjective cognitive decline (SCD), MCI, and AD based on EEG/MEG‐derived features. While quantitative ML methods have transformed biomarker research, they must be grounded in an understanding of AD's underlying neurobiology. This is not to understate the remarkable capacity of ML techniques in extracting features and patterns from data, but it is a cautionary note that ignoring biological principles could lead to biased dataset formation and selection which cannot be rectified by sheer data volume, methodological finesse, and computational capabilities. Many studies overlook the complex temporal dynamics of electrophysiological features, such as the biphasic evolution of α activity over the evolution of AD (early hyperactivity followed by later hypoactivity). Training classification models on datasets that do not adequately capture different AD stages can lead to overfitted algorithms, which may perform well on certain datasets, but fail to generalize across the broader AD population. To assess the relationship between electrophysiological AD signatures and (1) cognitive/behavioral manifestations (NPAs), (2) molecular pathology (biofluid markers and PET imaging of Aβ/tau), and (3) biomarker utility, we reviewed studies of AD that rigorously classified participants based on both NPA scores and at least one additional imaging or biofluid modality, alongside EEG/MEG resting‐state recordings. Surprisingly, studies integrating multimodal measurements were scarce. 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 Understanding electrophysiological signatures of a multifaceted pathology such as AD requires that these features be studied in conjunction with pathological processes, specifically the stage of proteinopathy and disease stage as outlined in Section 1.3, which is achieved best by including multimodal measurements and imaging in the study. This review both synthesizes existing findings and contextualizes them with AD pathophysiology. It highlights key inconsistencies in reported results, unresolved questions in the field, and future research directions. A key takeaway from this review is that electrophysiological signatures evolve alongside AD pathology in a dynamic, non‐linear fashion. These changes are not necessarily monotonic over time, nor do they align perfectly with Aβ/tau accumulation. Recognizing this complexity is essential for developing robust, generalizable biomarkers that can improve early diagnosis, staging, and treatment monitoring in AD. 2 METHODS We conducted a systematic literature search on PubMed and Web of Science (WoS) on May 14th, 2024, to identify relevant electrophysiological studies of AD. Our search strategy combined three criteria to systematically filter the extensive AD literature: Criterion 1 . Inclusion of AD, cognitive decline, or dementia‐related studies. Search terms: “Alzheimer's Disease” OR “AD” OR “Dementia” OR “Mild Cognitive Impairment” OR “MCI” OR “Cognitive Impair*” OR “Mild Cognitive Impair*” OR “Cognitive Decline.” Criterion 2 . Non‐invasive electrophysiological studies (MEG/EEG). Search terms: “EEG” OR “MEG” OR “Electroencephalogra*” OR “Magnetoencephalogra*” OR “Electrophysiological Source Imaging” OR “Electromagnetic Source Imaging” OR “ESI” OR “Source Imaging” OR “EEG Source Imaging” OR “MEG Source Imaging” OR “EEGI” OR “MEGI.” Criterion 3 . Studies including NPA or Aβ/tau protein levels. Search terms: “ MMSE” OR “Mini Mental State Exam*” OR “Mini‐Mental State Exam*” OR “MoCA” OR “Montreal Cognitive Assessment” OR “tau” OR “amyloid” OR “amyloid‐β” OR “amyloid β” OR “β‐amyloid” OR “β amyloid” OR “Aβ‐PET” OR “tau‐PET” OR “flortaucipir” OR “tau Tracer” OR “Aβ Tracer” OR “11C‐PiB” OR “tau Protein .” These criteria were combined using a Boolean operator (#1 AND #2 AND #3) within the advanced search tools of PubMed and WoS. The retrieved studies were exported to an Excel database, where results from both search databases PubMed and WoS were merged and deduplicated. Duplicate removal was performed by matching PubMed identification numbers (PMIDs) and then by sorting entries by the first author's name for manual review. This process yielded a total 2376 unique studies. To refine the selection, titles and abstracts were reviewed, and studies were excluded if they met any of the following criteria: (1) non‐focused on AD (e.g., other forms of dementia or neurological conditions), (2) animal studies, (3) task‐based EEG/MEG studies, (4) sleep studies, (5) review articles, (6) simulation studies, (7) book chapters, (8) conference papers, (9) non‐English publications, and (10) lacks of multimodal imaging or biofluid measurements (i.e., studies without PET, SPECT, fMRI, or biofluid markers of Aβ/tau pathology, including NFTs or neurofilament light chains). Applying these criteria resulted in a final selection of 49 studies. The search process is illustrated in Figure 1 , and study findings are summarized in Tables SI to SV . FIGURE 1 The PRISMA diagram of the study. The systematic review presented in this paper was conducted by searching PubMed and Web of Science (WoS) datasets. The criteria for inclusion can be summarized as follows: studies including resting‐state electroencephalography (EEG)/magnetoencephalography (MEG) recordings in Alzheimer's disease (AD)/mild cognitive impairment (MCI) subjects based on clinical assessment, that is, neuropsychological assessment (NPA) scores, as well as multimodal imaging or biofluid (plasma or cerebrospinal fluid [CSF]) measurements (amyloid beta [Aβ]/tau protein levels). The right panel shows the arm of the systematic review done separately for plasma‐related biomarkers (details can be found in the supplementary under methods for plasma/blood). Duplicate reports and conference/review papers were omitted, and ultimately 49 studies were selected. Please refer to methods (in the main text and the supplementary) for a full description. 3 RESULTS Changes in brain oscillatory activity are a hallmark of AD pathology, and most findings summarized here reflect this fact. In this context, brain oscillatory activity refers to the macro‐ and mesoscale rhythmic activity of neural populations that modulate or are modulated in synchrony. These neural oscillations are a prominent feature of electrophysiological recordings 98 and are typically quantified using power spectral density (PSD) analysis, though alternative methods exist to access instantaneous rhythmicity. 99 This section outlines the methods used to analyze neural oscillations (Tables 1 and 2 ), their relationship to biofluid proteinopathy markers and other imaging modalities (Tables 3 ), and NPA scores (Table 4 ). Additionally, we discuss how these oscillatory changes contribute to the detection, staging, classification, and prognosis of AD. Figure 2 provides a schematic summary of oscillatory changes across AD progression. TABLE 1 Key findings related to spectral features in Alzheimer's disease (AD)/mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Spectral features Changes in MCI/AD Key findings δ power (1 to 4 Hz) ↑ Increased 7 , 8 , 11 , 20 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 47 , 49 , 50 Directly linked to AD pathology 11 ; increased in dementia but decreased in SNAP. 12 θ power (4 to 8 Hz) ↑ Increased 7 , 8 , 11 , 20 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 47 , 49 , 50 Role is unclear, may be compensatory in early AD 18 , 25 but also linked to non‐AD pathology (SNAP). 12 α power (8 to 12 Hz) ↓ Decreased 7 , 8 , 21 , 23 , 25 , 47 , 48 , 50 Decline with AD progression 7 , 8 , 21 , 23 , 25 , 47 , 48 , 50 but may initially increase 11 , 12 , 13 , 55 as a compensatory response. β power (12 to 30 Hz) ↓ Decreased 8 , 18 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 42 , 50 AD‐specific decline, 8 , 12 , 50 particularly in occipital, temporal, and parietal regions. 8 , 18 , 24 , 50 γ power (30 to 100 Hz) ? Inconclusive Some reports suggest increase, 12 , 26 others decrease 8 , 42 ; unclear AD specificity. 12 α ‐ratios ( α δ and α θ ) ↓ Decreased 28 Consistent with decreased α power and increased δ / θ power. High‐ α to low‐ α ratio ↑ Increased (in MCI) 10 Participants with high ratio typically demonstrated low Aβ levels (CSF), high tau levels, and decreased glucose metabolism and the majority progressed to AD. 10 SPR ( α + β δ + θ ) ↓ Decreased 23 The SPR was found to significantly decrease in Aβ‐positive patients with amnesic MCI (aMCI). 23 Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer's disease; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; SNAP, suspected non‐Alzheimer's pathophysiology; SPR, spectral power ratio. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. TABLE 2 Key findings related to connectivity features in Alzheimer's disease (AD)/mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Connectivity features Changes in MCI/AD Key findings Synchrony δ / θ bands (1 to 4 Hz/4 to 8 Hz) ↑ Increased 14 , 34 , 36 Consistent with increased δ / θ power findings. Stable MCI and progressive MCI might possess different δ and θ coherence patterns. 36 α band (8 to 12 Hz) ↑ Increased 9 , 15 , 53 ↓ Decreased 14 , 34 , 36 Consistent with α power findings there might be a compensatory increase in early AD, followed by reduced synchrony in the α band, particularly in posterior/occipital regions. 14 , 34 , 36 AEC δ / θ bands (1 to 4 Hz/4 to 8 Hz) ↑ Increased 15 , 25 The increase in AEC is observed all over the brain 25 particularly in limbic‐parietal and limbic‐occipital connections. 15 The increased AEC in δ / θ band trails cognitive decline with a lag. 25 α / β bands (8 to 12 Hz/12 to 30 Hz) ↓ Decreased 25 AEC decrease in α / β bands is most severe in temporal regions and happens early in AD and continues to lead cognitive decline. It seems apt for the early detection of AD. 25 Pearson correlation δ / θ bands (1 to 4 Hz/4 to 8 Hz) ↑ Increased 9 Hyperconnectivity in the δ / θ band was observed between IPL and PCu. 9 α band (8 to 12 Hz) ↓ Decreased 9 Connectivity in the α band was reduced between the left IPL and PCu. 9 Micro‐state analysis μ ‐state A ↑ Increased occurrence 37 and contribution 37 The fMRI activity from temporal regions correlated with microstate A. 54 μ ‐state B ↑ Increased occurrence 37 , 54 and contribution 37 The fMRI activity from temporal regions correlated with microstate B. 54 μ ‐state C ↓ Decreased occurrence 37 , 54 and contribution 37 ↑ Increased duration 44 The increase in microstate C was correlated to MoCA scores, hence potentially of relevance to cognitive decline. 44 μ ‐state D ↓ Decreased occurrence 37 and contribution 37 microstate analysis appears to closely conform to resting‐state fMRI findings, reinforcing its potential as a biomarker for AD. Note : Definitions: Contribution (average percentage of the total time occupied by a microstate); Duration (average length of time a microstate persists); Occurrence (average number of microstate appearances per second). Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer's disease; AEC, amplitude envelope correlation; fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; IPL, inferior parietal lobule; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; PCu, precuneus. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. TABLE 3 Association of electrophysiological features and positron emission tomography (PET) amyloid beta (Aβ)/tau. Electrophysiological features PET Aβ PET tau δ / θ bands (1 to 4 Hz/4 to 8 Hz) + correlated with δ / θ power 21 + correlated with bilateral δ / θ connectivity 9 + correlated with inter‐PCu δ connectivity 9 U‐shape correlation 12 ? No report α band (8 to 12 Hz) + correlated with α power, 11 , 21 specifically in frontal areas + correlated with α connectivity 21 − correlated with α ‐peak slowing 9 − correlated with α power 21 − correlated with α ‐peak slowing 9 β band (12 to 30 Hz) + correlated with β power 21 − correlated with β power 16 Inverted U‐shape correlation 12 − correlated with β power 21 γ power (30 to 100 Hz) ? No report + correlated with γ power only in tau‐positive subjects (no correlation found in tau‐negative subjects) 26 POSI − correlated with POSI ? No report Synchrony ( δ band [1 to 4 Hz]) + correlated with δ synchrony 14 + correlated with δ synchrony 14 The relation is inverted when Aβ/tau levels are high simultaneously emphasizing the interaction of Aβ/tau protein levels. 14 Synchrony ( α band [8 to 12 Hz]) ? No report − correlated with α synchrony 14 The relation is inverted when Aβ/tau levels are high simultaneously emphasizing the interaction of Aβ/tau protein levels. 14 AEC ( α / β bands [8 to 12 Hz/12 to 30 Hz]) ? No report The tau deposition was estimated much more accurately with AEC measures compared to structural or diffusion MRI. 22 Association of electrophysiological features and biofluid Aβ/tau Electrophysiological features CSF Aβ CSF tau δ band (1 to 4 Hz) − correlated with δ power 31 , 34 and GFP 34 − correlated with δ GFP (t‐tau and p‐tau) 34 θ band (4 to 8 Hz) − correlated with θ power 31 , 34 ? No report α band (8 to 12 Hz) + correlated with α power 30 , 34 + correlated with α ‐peak slowing 16 − correlated with α power 16 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 34 + correlated with α ‐peak slowing (p‐tau) 16 β band (12 to 30 Hz) + correlated with β power 16 , 30 , 34 − correlated with β power 16 , 30 , 34 Abbreviations: AEC, amplitude envelope correlation; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; GFP, global field power; PCu, precuneus; POSI, pathological oscillation slowing index; p‐tau, phosphorylated tau; t‐tau, total tau. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. TABLE 4 Correlation of electrophysiological features and neuropsychological assessment (NPA) scores. Electrophysiological features Relationship to cognitive decline (MMSE, MoCA, ACE, GDS, and so forth) δ / θ power (1 to 4 Hz/4 to 8 Hz) Higher power correlates with worse cognition 7 , 36 , 46 , 48 , 52 but θ increase in STC may be compensatory. 18 α power (8 to 12 Hz) Mixed findings: some report no correlation, 11 , 18 while other show a negative correlation, 7 , 13 , 47 , 48 , 52 particularly in posterior regions. 13 , 47 β power/coherence (12 to 30 Hz) Decreases with AD progression and positively correlates with cognitive scores. 36 , 47 , 52 γ power (30 to 100 Hz) Positively correlates with MMSE, suggesting a role in cognitive function. 14 High‐ α versus low‐ α ratio Lower‐ α power negatively correlates with cognition, while higher‐ α power shows positive correlation. 52 POSI Negatively correlated with cognition; greater slowing is associated with worse cognitive function. 20 Synchrony ( α band [8to 12 Hz]) Positively correlates with MMSE and other cognitive scores. 14 μ ‐state A Significantly correlated to MMSE scores in AD patients. 37 μ ‐state C Duration positively correlates with MMSE and MOCA scores. 44 Abbreviations: ACE, Addenbrooke's cognitive examination; GDS, global scale deterioration; GFP, global field power; MMSE, Mini‐Mental State Examination; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment; NPA, neuropsychological assessment; POSI, pathological oscillation slowing index; STC, superior temporal cortex. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. FIGURE 2 Schematic summary of findings: Alzheimer's disease (AD)‐related electrophysiological changes (top panel) and evolution of other biomarkers (bottom panel) throughout AD progression. The top panel illustrates how brain oscillatory activity evolves over different AD stages. Electrophysiological changes emerge early in AD, often before structural and metabolic abnormalities become detectable. Notably, α oscillations follow a biphasic trajectory, with an initial compensatory increase in the preclinical phase, followed by a progressive decline as the disease advances. For β , δ , and θ oscillations, our review does not definitively conclude whether early hyperactivity or hypoactivity predominates, but possible alternative trajectories are represented by dashed lines. These uncertain pathways emphasize the need for longitudinal studies to clarify early‐stage oscillatory dynamics. The bottom panel depicts the temporal progression of biochemical and imaging biomarkers in AD. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) amyloid beta (Aβ) levels initially rise but later decline, coinciding with cortical Aβ deposition. However, the trajectory of CSF tau levels remains inconclusive, as some studies suggest they stay elevated, while others indicate a later decline, represented by solid and dashed gold lines, respectively. Overall, this figure emphasizes the complexity of electrophysiological changes in AD and highlights the necessity of multimodal approaches in biomarker research. The schematic was inspired by the visual styles of Sperling et al. 58 and Gallego‐Rudolf et al. 104 3.1 Electrophysiological features of AD The range of reported analysis techniques in AD research, applied to EEG/MEG recordings 100 , 101 or source‐space signals derived from electromagnetic source imaging (ESI) projections, 100 , 102 is remarkably diverse. In our review, we identified approximately 23 distinct analytical approaches. To maintain brevity, we present only the most frequently used methods – defined as those reported in five or more studies – while a comprehensive list is provided in the supplementary materials. To categorize the breadth of employed methodologies, we grouped them into six major categories: (1) spectral features: measure the oscillatory characteristics of individual brain region, typically with PSD; (2) connectivity features: assess inter‐regional interactions, quantifying functional and effective connectivity between brain areas; (3) linearized neural mass models (NMMs): bridge spectral features with underlying neurophysiological parameters, such as excitability and inhibition; (4) microstate analysis: characterizes instantaneous spatial topographies of EEG/MEG activity into stable states, examining their frequency, stability, and transitions between states; (5) mutual information and entropy measures: capture non‐linear dynamics, extending beyond traditional correlation effects; (6) graph‐theoretical features: analyze the topological organization of brain networks, assessing local, and global information processing. Each of these methodologies provides a distinct lens though which AD‐related neurophysiological changes can be examined – emphasizing the multifaceted nature of AD pathology. 3.1.1 Spectral measures Most studies categorize electrophysiology activity into the standard frequency bands: δ (1 to 4 Hz), θ (4 to 8 Hz), α (8 to 12 Hz), and β (12 to 30 Hz). The primary method focus of this section is PSD, due to its frequent use. 7 , 8 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 16 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 28 , 32 , 33 , 35 , 41 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 PSD's standardized computation, simplicity, and interpretability makes it a widely used measure. Additionally, we highlight studies that examined ratios between higher and lower frequency bands, including high‐ α to low‐ α ratio 10 ; α ‐to‐ δ power ratio, 28 α ‐to‐ θ ratio 28 ; spectral power ratio (SPR), defined as the total power in α and β bands divided by the total power in δ and θ bands 23 ; and pathological oscillation slowing index (POSI), 20 a measure introduced by Wiesman et al. that quantifies the shift from high‐ to low‐frequency oscillations in AD, compared to healthy, age‐matched variants. 20 Spectral power Most studies have reported increased δ and θ power in AD patients compared to controls, 7 , 8 , 11 , 20 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 47 , 49 , 50 with the frontal, temporal, and parietal regions particularly affected. 21 , 24 , 47 , 50 However, the role of θ remains debated. Some studies suggest that posterior θ and δ power increases in MCI are observed only in amyloid‐negative (Aβ−) groups, not in amyloid‐positive (Aβ + ) groups, implying that these changes may not be directly linked with Aβ deposition, a hallmark of AD. 60 Other findings indicate that increased θ power may serve a compensatory role, as it has been associated with better memory performance. 18 It has been shown that δ / θ power progressively increases with AD progression, lagging neurodegeneration as indicated by parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) volume loss, 25 further supporting the compensatory hypothesis. Higher θ power has been observed in progressive MCI (pMCI) patients at follow‐up, 50 and increased relative θ power has been linked to progression to AD, although only in SCD patients, not in MCI. 33 In contrast, δ power increases appear to be more directly related to AD pathology. 11 Studies show that while δ power decreases in suspected non‐Alzheimer's pathophysiology (SNAP) patients, 12 it increases in those with AD, suggesting that it may be a disease‐specific marker. SNAP patients, defined as Aβ− individuals with neurodegeneration, exhibit lower δ power compared to Aβ− healthy controls, 12 further reinforcing the hypothesis that increased δ power is specific to AD‐related processes. Most studies have reported decreased α power in AD patients, 7 , 8 , 21 , 23 , 25 , 47 , 48 , 50 particularly in the posterior cortex, including occipital, temporal, and parietal regions. 11 , 13 , 21 , 23 An interventional study demonstrated that patients treated with nerve growth factor (NGF) exhibited improved NPA scores alongside increased α power at follow‐up, which remained stable over a year, 41 aligning with the general trend of α power decline as AD progresses. However, some studies suggest that α oscillations exhibit a more complex pattern across AD progression, suggesting that α power may initially increase in early AD before declining in later stages. 11 , 12 , 13 , 55 Nakamura et al. argue that α oscillations are specifically associated with Aβ deposition rather than broader AD pathology. 11 Additionally, MCI patients exhibit a peak α frequency at 9.5 Hz, whereas HCs have a peak at 10.5 Hz 11 (confidence intervals not reported), suggesting early compensatory mechanisms. Some studies have also reported hypersynchrony of α oscillations in early AD and MCI, followed by α desynchronization in later disease stages. 30 , 53 , 83 , 103 To further investigate these conflicting findings, we compared the NPA scores of studies reporting α power increases versus those reporting decreases. The results, presented in Figure 3 , show that studies reporting increased α power or synchrony included patients with higher NPA scores. This finding supports the hypothesis that in the early stages of AD, increased α power may reflect a compensatory mechanism that later declines as neurodegeneration progresses. A standardized mean difference analysis, detailed in the supplementary materials (Tables SVI and SVII ), further confirmed that categorizing studies based on (a proxy of) disease stage significantly explained the observed variability. These findings align with a biphasic trajectory of α activity in AD, in which early Aβ accumulation leads to strengthened α activity, followed by a decline as neurodegeneration accelerates. 104 FIGURE 3 Forest plots of alpha activity across approximated Alzheimer's disease (AD) stages (effect sizes). This figure presents standardized mean differences (meta‐analysis results) from studies reporting either increased or decreased α activity ( α band power or connectivity) in AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) populations. (A) Summary of effect sizes of studies reporting decreased α activity. (B) Summary of those reporting increased α activity. The effect size is defined as the standardized difference in means ( z ‐score) of neuropsychological assessment (NPA) scores between the AD/MCI group and the healthy control group in each study, which serves as a rough approximation of AD progression stage (in the absence of consistent reports of protein levels in the relevant studies reviewed). Detailed methodological descriptions and statistical results are provided in the supplementary materials. Beta power is consistently reported to decrease in AD, 8 , 18 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 42 , 50 particularly in occipital, temporal, and parietal regions. 8 , 18 , 24 , 50 pMCI patients demonstrate lower β power in temporal and occipital regions at follow‐up, 8 , 50 further linking β power reductions to disease progression. Additionally, an analysis of SNAP patients indicated increased β power, indirectly suggesting that β power reduction may be an AD‐specific trait. 12 Reports on γ (30 to 100 Hz) power in AD are scarce and inconsistent. Some studies have reported a decrease in γ power, 8 , 42 whereas others indicate an increase. 12 Patients in AD stage II, defined as those with both neurodegeneration and Aβ deposition, exhibited increased γ activity in left frontal‐temporal regions. 12 Furthermore, tau‐positive patients demonstrated increased γ power in frontal and parietal regions. 26 However, SNAP patients exhibited increased γ activity in both temporal lobes, suggesting that γ laterization may not be specific to AD. 12 The variability in γ power findings highlights the need for further investigation. In summary, δ and θ power generally increase in AD, although the role of θ remains unclear. Alpha power typically decreases over the course of the disease, but evidence suggests it may initially increase as a compensatory mechanism before declining (Figure 2 ). Beta power reductions appear to be AD‐specific, particularly in posterior brain regions. Findings on γ power remain inconclusive, with reports of both increases and decreases, necessitating further study. These spectral power alterations provide critical insight into the neurophysiological underpinnings of AD (Table 1 ) and may serve as potential biomarkers for disease progression. Alpha ratios and other spectral features Three different α ‐related measures, collectively referred to as α ratios, were reported in the reviewed literature: the α ‐to‐ θ power ratio, the α ‐to‐ δ ratio, and the high‐ α to low‐ α ratio. 10 , 28 Both the α ‐to‐ θ and α ‐to‐ δ ratios showed significant decreases in AD patients compared to HCs, in line with expectations. 28 Given that α power typically declines while δ and θ power increase in AD, a reduction in these ratios is a natural consequence, as confirmed by Jelic et al. 28 The SPR was found to significantly decrease in Aβ+ patients with amnesic MCI (aMCI). 23 This further supports the notion that spectral slowing in AD reflects the progressive imbalance between lower and higher frequency bands. Moretti et al. identified two peaks within the α band of MCI patients, with distinctive neurobiological correlates. Subjects exhibiting these two peaks had lower glucose metabolism, lower CSF Aβ42/Aβ40 levels, and higher total tau (t‐tau) and p‐tau. 10 The high‐ α to low‐ α ratio was significantly higher in this subset of individuals, and approximately 63% of these subjects later progressed to AD. 10 These findings suggest that alterations in α ‐band dynamics may serve as an early predictor of AD progression and further accentuate the relationship between spectral slowing and underlying neurodegenerative processes. The key findings discussed here with regard to the evolution of these spectral features over the course of AD pathology are summarized in Table 1 . 3.1.2 Connectivity measures AD pathology disrupts large‐scale brain networks, leading to alterations of connectivity patterns. In line with the disconnection hypothesis, 17 most studies have reported reduced functional connectivity across various frequency bands. However, some findings might suggest increased synchrony at lower frequencies. 9 , 15 , 53 In electrophysiology, connectivity measures can generally be categorized into amplitude‐based measures and phase‐based measures. 105 In this review, amplitude‐based measures include coherence, 106 synchrony, 107 Pearson correlation, 108 and amplitude envelope correlation (AEC), 109 , 110 whereas phase‐based measures include phase‐locking value (PLV) 111 and global field synchrony (GFS). 112 This section focuses on amplitude‐based measures, while a more detailed discussion of phase‐based measures is available in the supplementary materials. Coherence and synchrony Coherence quantifies the degree to which two time series can be linearly transformed into each other, at a specific frequency, with a coherence value of 1 indicating perfect correlation and 0 indicating independence. Synchrony, on the other hand, is derived from the imaginary part of coherence, 113 computed for all possible pairs of nodes (brain regions or sensors), which provides a measure of connection strength or network importance. 14 , 53 The imaginary part of coherence, and by construction synchrony, is less affected by spurious effects of volume conduction, making synchrony a more robust measure of connectivity. 113 Findings on α synchrony in AD are inconsistent. Some studies have reported increased α synchrony, 9 , 15 , 53 while others find decreased α coherence alongside increased δ and θ coherence. 34 , 36 Musaeus et al. further observed that stable MCI (sMCI) and pMCI had different δ and θ coherence patterns. 36 These findings align with PSD analyses cited earlier, 7 , 8 , 11 , 18 , 20 , 21 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 42 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 where increased low‐frequency activity and reduced high‐frequency activity accompany lowered metabolic rates in AD patients. Ranasinghe et al. presented conflicting results regarding synchrony. 14 , 53 Initially, they reported α hyposynchrony in posterior and occipital regions, with δ / θ hypersynchrony in frontal, temporal, and parietal regions 14 ; however, in a later study, they observed the opposite pattern, with increased α synchrony and decreased δ / θ synchrony in early AD patients. 53 This discrepancy supports the hypothesis that some spectral and connectivity features exhibit compensatory increases in early AD, before declining with advancing neurodegeneration. This aligns with findings from spectral power analyses (Section 3.1.1 ). Pearson's correlation and amplitude envelope correlation Nakamura et al. applied source imaging to extract neural sources and used Pearson's correlation to quantify connectivity between brain regions. 9 Their findings revealed δ and θ hyperconnectivity between the bilateral inferior parietal lobule (IPL) and precuneus (PCu) regions, whereas connectivity in the α band was reduced between the left IPL and PCu. Kocagoncu et al. used AEC, a method that extracts the oscillatory envelopes of neural activity and measures their correlations. 15 Their study demonstrated that δ ‐band connectivity was increased within limbic‐parietal and limbic‐occipital regions in probable‐AD patients compared to HCs. In line with these findings, Kudo et al. observed that average AEC values exhibited a biphasic pattern across frequency bands. 25 Specifically, AEC in the δ / θ band increased, while it decreased in the α and β bands throughout the brain, with a more pronounced effect in temporal regions as AD progressed. Notably, αi and β ‐band connectivity reductions occurred early in the disease, predominantly during the pre‐AD phase, whereas δ / θ connectivity changes followed later, trailing neuronal atrophy and volume loss. This distinction in temporal evolution suggests that connectivity alterations in α and β bands may serve as potential early biomarkers for AD detection, whereas δ / θ connectivity changes may reflect later‐stage neurodegeneration. 3.1.3 Microstate analyses Microstates represent relatively stable periods of EEG activity during which the underlying macroscale brain networks remain stable, yielding similar EEG scalp topography. 114 These EEG topographical maps are particularly informative when extracted from resting‐state data, as they are conceived to reflect the intrinsic functional architecture of the brain. Microstates are typically clustered into four distinct states, conventionally called A, B, C, and D. 37 States A and B exhibit spatially asymmetric topographies, predominantly reflecting temporal and parietal activity, while C and D display laterally symmetric maps, associated with frontal and occipital activity. Smailovic et al. found that the occurrence (average number of microstate appearances per second) and contribution (average percentage of the total time occupied by a microstate) of states A and B increased in MCI and AD patients, whereas the occurrence and contribution of states C and D decreased relative to healthy controls. 37 Yan et al. further observed that microstate C had increased duration (average length of time a microstate persists) in AD patients, with significant correlations to Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) and Mini‐Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores. 44 Some studies identified novel, data‐specific microstates that correlated with CSF Aβ levels. 42 However, utilizing normative microstates (A, B, C, and D) enhances comparability across studies. Teipel et al. analyzing fMRI time series alongside microstate dynamics, demonstrated that microstate B had increased occurrences in AD patients, while microstate C was reduced. 54 Additionally, microstate C correlated with the default mode network, which is known to be disrupted in AD. 115 Temporal lobe activity, measured via fMRI, correlated with microstates A and B, both of which were more prevalent in AD patients. These findings suggest a shift toward anteriorized brain activity and network organization in AD. 54 This aligns with Müller et al.’s reports of α anteriorization in AD. 48 Taken together, microstate analysis appears to closely conform to resting‐state fMRI findings, reinforcing its potential as a biomarker for AD. Given that microstates reflect macroscale functional and structural connectivity, they may provide a valuable tool for tracking disease progression. Table 2 summarizes the findings discussed here with respect to connectivity measures. 3.2 Relation to Aβ or tau measured from PET scans In the δ and θ frequency bands, a positive correlation between PET Aβ uptake and PSD power has been reported. 21 However, Gaubert et al. demonstrated a more complex U‐shaped relationship between δ power and PET Aβ. 12 In their study, which included preclinical AD participants, δ power initially exhibited a negative correlation with Aβ deposition at lower levels, but this relationship became positive at higher levels of cortical Aβ accumulation. Additionally, bilateral increased connectivity in the δ and θ bands, as well as enhanced inter‐PCu δ connectivity, were positively correlated with cortical Aβ deposition. 9 In the α frequency band, studies indicate a positive correlation between α power and PET Aβ uptake. 11 , 21 This suggests that higher α power is associated with increased Aβ deposition in the cortex. Conversely, α power was negatively correlated with PET tau uptake. 21 Nakamura et al. 11 specifically found that frontal α power exhibited this correlation. Interestingly, α ‐peak slowing was negatively correlated with both Aβ deposition and PET tau uptake. Furthermore, left‐side α hypoconnectivity was negatively correlated with PET Aβ uptake, indicating that higher α connectivity was linked to greater cortical Aβ deposition. 9 Findings regarding β power and Aβ deposition are conflicting. Some studies have reported a positive correlation between β power and cortical Aβ deposition, 21 while others indicate a negative correlation between β power and Aβ uptake. 16 Gaubert et al. described an inverted U‐shaped relationship between β power and cortical Aβ deposition, a pattern that was also observed in γ ‐band power and entropy measures. 12 This non‐linear association between electrophysiological measures and cortical Aβ deposition became more pronounced when only patients with neurodegeneration (based on glucose metabolism markers from PET) were analyzed. In the γ frequency range, γ power was positively correlated with tau load in tau‐positive patients, as measured by PET tau standardized uptake value ratios. However, this correlation did not exist for tau‐negative patients or Aβ deposition, indicating that γ power alterations may be more closely related to tau pathology than Aβ accumulation. 26 POSI, a measure of global spectral slowing, showed a negative correlation with PET Aβ uptake, indicating that increased Aβ deposition was associated with greater spectral slowing. 20 Electrophysiological connectivity measures further highlight the complex relationship between AD pathology and neural oscillations. Alpha synchrony was negatively correlated with PET tau uptake, 14 while δ synchrony was positively correlated with both Aβ and tau uptake. However, when both Aβ and tau uptake levels were high, this relationship was inverted, suggesting that electrophysiological features do not simply scale with proteinopathy but may reflect an interaction between amyloid and tau accumulations. This pattern aligns with the Aβ/tau cascade hypothesis, in which tau accumulation increases in later disease stages, potentially driving distinct neurobiological dynamics as AD progresses. Beta power was negatively correlated with PET tau uptake. 21 Additionally, Schoonhoven et al. applied AEC connectivity measures in the α and β bands within a susceptible‐infectious (SI) model to estimate tau deposition distribution in the brain. 22 Their findings indicated that functional connectivity in the α and β bands best predicted tau deposition in MCI and AD patients, compared to structural and diffusion connectivity measures. This suggests that α ‐ and β ‐band connectivity may serve as early biomarkers of AD 25 and could be used to predict tau deposition profiles, reinforcing the validity of α / β AEC as a potential biomarker for early AD detection. These findings suggest that some discrepancies in the literature regarding electrophysiological markers of AD may be related to differences in Aβ and tau deposition levels, which vary across disease stages. The interplay between protein accumulation and electrophysiological changes, particularly in the context of early compensatory mechanisms, underscores the importance of incorporating multimodal biomarker assessments when designing and validating electrophysiological markers for early AD detection. A summary of these findings is presented in Table 3 . 3.3 Relation to biofluid Aβ or tau protein levels The levels of Aβ proteins in CSF exhibit a dynamic trajectory across AD progression. Initially, CSF Aβ levels rise, but as Aβ plaques and tau NFTs accumulate in the cortex, CSF Aβ levels begin to decline. 34 , 61 Electrophysiological features within the δ and θ frequency bands generally demonstrated negative correlations with CSF Aβ and tau levels. 31 , 34 Specifically, CSF Aβ was negatively correlated with δ and θ global field power (GFP), 34 as well as θ power in right temporal regions. 31 Additionally, δ GFP was negatively correlated with CSF total tau (t‐tau) and p‐tau. GFP can be interpreted as the average power across all electrophysiological sensor or source time series for each frequency band. Alpha‐band features predominantly exhibited positive correlations with CSF Aβ levels 16 , 30 , 34 and negative correlations with CSF tau protein levels. 16 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 34 However, Tanabe et al. reported a positive correlation between α ‐peak slowing and p‐tau. 16 This unexpected observation may be explained by an earlier study in which the α ‐to‐ δ and α ‐to‐ θ power ratios were correlated with CSF tau levels, revealing a U‐shaped relationship. 28 At lower tau levels, α ratios were negatively correlated with tau, decreasing as tau levels increased. However, as tau levels continued to rise, this relationship reversed, with α ratios increasing again. Additionally, Jelic et al. found that CSF tau levels followed a bell‐curve trajectory, rising during AD progression but eventually declining in long‐term AD patients. 28 These findings highlight the complex and non‐linear role of α ‐band activity in AD pathology. Features within the β band generally exhibited positive correlations with CSF Aβ levels and negative correlations with CSF tau levels. 16 , 30 , 34 Specifically, β power positively correlated with CSF Aβ. 16 Microstate analyses also revealed associations between CSF biomarkers and electrophysiological dynamics. Microstates B and C correlated with both CSF tau and CSF Aβ levels, suggesting that large‐scale functional network alterations in AD were closely tied to amyloid and tau pathology. 37 , 44 Interpreting these findings remains challenging. Since δ and θ power generally increase with AD progression, while α and β power decrease, one would expect their respective negative and positive correlations with CSF Aβ levels to indicate CSF Aβ decline over time. However, this appears contradictory to the well‐established pattern in which CSF Aβ levels initially rise in early AD before declining in later stages. A possible explanation for this discrepancy is that the studies reviewed may have included participants at different stages of AD progression. Specifically, if the study from Tanabe et al. 16 is set aside, due to fact that a high proportion of its subjects was cognitively unimpaired and the results mainly focused on α ‐peak slowing rather than spectral power, the study participants in the remaining studies 28 , 31 , 34 reported here showed considerably low MMSE scores, indicating advanced AD with clear manifestation of cognitive impairment. The participants in the Canuet et al. 30 showed only moderate decline in MMSE scores but were already showing reduced α and β connectivity between different brain areas, which may be indicative of a relatively progressed disease stage. In early AD, when Aβ is still accumulating in the cortex, CSF Aβ levels are typically elevated. However, in more advanced AD, Aβ deposition in the brain increases while CSF Aβ levels decline, as the protein is increasingly sequestered in plaques. If some studies primarily examined patients in later disease stages, this could explain the observed negative correlations between CSF Aβ and δ / θ power and positive correlations with α / β power, consistent with later‐stage AD physiology. 28 A summary is presented in Table 3 . 3.4 Relation to NPAs Several electrophysiological features demonstrated significant correlations with NPA and cognitive scores, most notably the MMSE. Establishing a link between electrophysiological changes and cognitive performance is critical for determining their relevance to AD pathology. However, as Gaubert et al. caution, these relationships must be interpreted with care, as non‐AD dementia processes may also influence cognitive decline. 12 The relationship between δ and θ power and NPAs appears relatively straightforward. Multiple studies have reported that higher δ and θ power are associated with more severe cognitive decline. 7 , 36 , 46 , 48 , 52 However, Wiesman et al. found that increased θ power in the right superior temporal cortex (STC) and supramarginal gyrus positively correlated with memory performance. 18 Interestingly, these were the only spectral features correlated with functional independence, suggesting that θ power increases may reflect a compensatory mechanism rather than a direct marker of disease severity. This underscores the complexity of interpreting electrophysiological changes in AD – an increase or decrease in a particular feature could be due to AD pathology, non‐AD dementia processes, or compensatory activity. Similarly, Musaeus et al. found that θ coherence was negatively correlated with Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination (ACE) scores, reinforcing the association between increasing θ power and cognitive decline. 36 In contrast, α ‐peak frequency showed no correlation with MMSE. 47 The relationship between α power and NPAs remains inconclusive. Two studies reported no correlation between α power and cognitive scores, 11 , 18 while others aligned with the established view that α power reduction and spectral slowing correlate with AD progression and cognitive decline. 7 , 13 , 47 , 48 , 52 However, two of these studies limited this relationship to posterior α . 13 , 47 This raises the question of whether distinct sources of α oscillations exist with different roles in AD pathology or whether variability in study findings reflects differences in disease stage at the time of participant recruitment. Supporting the former hypothesis, Hoshi et al. reported that lower‐ α power correlated negatively with NPA scores, whereas higher‐ α power exhibited a positive correlation, suggesting functionally distinct roles for different α sub‐bands. 52 Further complicating the α ‐band dynamics, Nakamura et al. suggested that α power was more closely associated with Aβ deposition than with AD‐related neurodegeneration. 11 Most of the studies reviewed here did not separate Aβ− and Aβ+ subjects, potentially confounding the effects of amyloid pathology and cognitive decline. Additionally, α synchrony was positively correlated with MMSE, implying that as cognitive function declines, brain connectivity and α ‐band synchronization deteriorate. Beta power, frequently reported as decreasing in AD patients, also correlated with cognitive decline. 47 , 52 Beta coherence showed a positive correlation with both ACE and MMSE scores, indicating that decreasing β ‐band connectivity was associated with worsening cognition. 36 Similarly, Hoshi et al. reported a positive correlation between MMSE scores and γ power, suggesting that higher γ power was associated with better cognitive performance. 52 The POSI index in the left middle temporal cortex positively correlated with MoCA scores, attention, and verbal performance. 20 This finding reinforces the idea that more pronounced spectral slowing is associated with greater cognitive impairment. Taken together, these results highlight a general trend in AD: As NPA scores decline, α and β power decrease, while δ and θ power increase – though the intricacies of α ‐band oscillations remain unresolved. Beyond spectral features, microstate analysis also showed strong relationships with NPAs. A modified analysis of variance demonstrated that microstate A was significantly related to MMSE scores in AD patients. 37 Additionally, the duration of microstate C positively correlated with both MMSE and MoCA scores. 44 Refer to Table 4 for an overview. 3.5 Patient classification and prognosis The ability of electrophysiological features to classify AD patients or predict disease progression is crucial for assessing their clinical utility. Reliable classification and prognosis could help determine which electrophysiological markers are best suited for early diagnosis, disease monitoring, and clinical decision‐making. 3.5.1 AD classification Early classification studies demonstrated that simple thresholding methods, of spectral power, could achieve high accuracy in distinguishing between normal individuals and probable AD patients. 7 More recently, two studies demonstrated that EEG spectral measures could differentiate Aβ+ from Aβ− patients in MCI cohorts, 23 , 24 highlighting their sensitivity to core AD biomarkers such as Aβ. 60 Furthermore, Yan et al. used EEG microstate dynamics to successfully classify AD patients versus HCs, demonstrating the potential of microstates as AD biomarkers. 44 Cohorts with more participants showed robust, albeit moderate, results. Gaubert et al. conducted a large‐scale study (300+ subjects) and identified median spectral frequency (MSF) and γ power as the most effective EEG features for detecting neurodegeneration, achieving an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.62 and a balanced accuracy of 0.61. 19 Some studies employed dedicated regressors to classify patients across multiple diagnostic categories, including HC, MCI, AD, and other dementias. 32 , 35 In a large‐scale retrospective study (500+ cases), classifiers achieved an AUC of 77.1% for distinguishing HCs from all other conditions, and an AUC of 90.5% for distinguishing HCs from AD. 32 Another study compared the performance of quantitative EEG (qEEG) methods versus traditional visual EEG inspection in classifying AD versus MCI. 35 The qEEG‐based support vector machine (SVM) approach significantly outperformed visual inspection. However, both methods struggled to distinguish between stable and pMCI cases, a challenge also noted in Gouw et al.’s prospective study. 33 This suggests that while ML approaches can be beneficial for early AD detection and disease monitoring, they may face challenges in predicting individual prognosis, possibly due to (1) the dynamic nature of AD pathology, in which early‐stage AD signatures differ from later stages, and (2) algorithmic overfitting, where models capture dataset‐specific patterns rather than generalizable disease biomarkers. 3.5.2 Predicting patient prognosis Several studies suggest that normal, MCI, and AD patients exhibit distinct EEG/MEG features, and these differences may offer predictive value for disease progression. 29 , 38 Briels et al. reported that patients with abnormal EEG patterns exhibited more severe disease progression, reinforcing the potential of electrophysiological features as prognostic markers. 38 Some studies have indicated that increased coherence in δ and θ bands in MCI patients is associated with a higher likelihood of conversion to AD. 36 Moretti et al. reported that low‐metabolism MCI patients exhibited a high α ratio (characterized by two peaks in the α band), and 62.54% of these individuals progressed to AD within 2 years. 10 Jelic et al. conducted regression analyses on different predictive models, incorporating MMSE scores, EEG features, and follow‐up data, and concluded that using MMSE scores combined with EEG features to distinguish sMCI from pMCI yielded best results. 50 Gouw et al. employed Cox proportional hazard models to assess the utility of EEG features in predicting long‐term AD progression. 33 Their findings indicated that higher θ power in SCD patients was predictive of conversion to MCI and, eventually, to AD. However, in MCI subjects, EEG features did not reliably predict AD progression. 33 Their conclusion was that EEG features were most effective for prognosis in early stages (SCD) but became less predictive as AD pathology advances. This result aligns with the observation by Schjønning et al. that predicting MCI‐to‐AD progression remains a challenge. 35 Findings from both retrospective AD classification studies and prospective prognosis studies tentatively support the early detection of AD using non‐invasive electrophysiological measures (EEG/MEG). However, challenges remain, emphasizing the need for further research with rigorously staged AD cohorts to refine prognostic models and improve their clinical applicability. 3.6 Relation to metabolism (PET) Electrophysiological features have been shown to correlate with glucose metabolism, as measured by FDG PET, 8 suggesting that as metabolic activity declines in AD, δ power increases. Similarly, θ power 12 and several connectivity measures 17 were negatively correlated with glucose metabolism, reinforcing the idea that lower metabolic rates are associated with increases in low‐frequency oscillations. Smailovic et al. found that θ power negatively correlated with glucose metabolism in the bilateral parietal and temporal regions, while δ power was negatively correlated with glucose metabolism in the left parietal lobe. 17 These findings are in line with the widely accepted notion that as glucose metabolism declines in AD, δ and θ power (and connectivity) tend to increase. The relationship between α oscillations and glucose metabolism is more complex. Smailovic et al. found that α and β coherence positively correlated with glucose metabolism in the bilateral temporal and parietal regions 17 . However, Moretti et al. reported that the α ratio (high‐ α power divided by low‐ α power) follows a U‐shaped relationship with metabolism. 10 Initially, as the α ratio increases, glucose metabolism decreases, but at higher α ‐ratio values, metabolism increases again. It is important to note that this study focused on MCI subjects, and as AD progresses and neurodegeneration advances, glucose metabolism ultimately declines. 59 , 60 Additionally, Moretti et al. found that MCI subjects with higher α ratios were more likely to progress to AD. 10 Whether this pattern reflects a compensatory mechanism or a distinct disease‐related process remains an open question. Instantaneous linear connectivity in the α (bilateral temporal and parietal regions) and β (bilateral parietal regions) bands was also found to be positively correlated with glucose metabolism rates. 17 These findings suggest that α and β connectivity could serve as markers of preserved metabolic function, at least in earlier disease stages. A notable study by Nakamura et al. highlighted that δ ‐band connectivity alterations were detectable in older individuals at risk for AD, even when no significant changes in glucose metabolism were observed. 9 This suggests that electrophysiological changes may precede detectable metabolic decline, reinforcing the potential of EEG/MEG as early biomarkers of AD. However, the non‐linear and dynamic behavior of α ‐band features over the disease course stresses the need for longitudinal studies to better understand their role in AD pathology. A short summary is presented in Table 5 . TABLE 5 Correlation of electrophysiological features and glucose metabolism. Frequency band Correlation to FDG‐PET in MCI/AD Key findings δ band (1 to 4 Hz) − correlated [ δ power] 8 δ power negatively correlates with glucose metabolism in left parietal region. Changes in δ power occurs prior to hypometabolism. 8 θ band (4 to 8 Hz) − correlated [ θ power] 12 − correlated [ θ connectivity] 17 θ power negatively correlates with glucose metabolism in bilateral temporal and parietal regions. 17 α band (8 to 12 Hz) + correlated [coherence] 17 + correlated [inst. linear conn.] 17 U‐shape correlation [high‐ α to low‐ α ratio] 10 α coherence is positively correlated with glucose metabolism in bilateral temporal and parietal regions. 17 The instantaneous linear connectivity was correlated to glucose metabolism in bilateral parietal regions. β band (12 to 30 Hz) + correlated [coherence] 17 + correlated [inst. linear conn.] 17 β coherence is positively correlated with glucose metabolism in bilateral temporal regions. 17 The instantaneous linear connectivity was correlated to glucose metabolism in bilateral parietal regions. Abbreviations: FDG‐PET, fluorodeoxyglucose‐positron emission tomography; inst. linear conn., instantaneous linear connectivity; MCI/AD, mild cognitive impairment/Alzheimer's disease. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. 4 DISCUSSION This review examined the electrophysiological signatures of AD using non‐invasive EEG and MEG recordings in resting‐state conditions. By focusing on studies that incorporated multimodal imaging or biomarker comparisons, we aimed to establish links between neurobiological processes, such as protein pathology, and electrophysiological alterations. A key finding is that spectral power and connectivity measures (such as AEC and synchrony) consistently showed significant differences between healthy controls, MCI, and AD patients. These features were correlated with Aβ and/or tau protein levels, as well as NPA scores, reinforcing their potential as biomarkers of AD progression. However, an important takeaway is that electrophysiological biomarkers may exhibit different behaviors at different stages of the disease. 11 , 12 , 25 Particularly noteworthy is the complexity of α oscillations (Figure 2 ). While θ and α oscillations are generally effective in predicting prognosis 4 , 33 , 42 findings on α dynamics remain contradictory across studies. This inconsistency poses a critical challenge for researchers and algorithm developers working on early AD detection and staging. Without a clear understanding of the relationship between electrophysiology and neurobiology, significant misinterpretations may arise – especially in studies that lack cross‐modal validation. When evaluating the clinical relevance of electrophysiological features, prospective studies, which attempt to predict which MCI patients will convert to AD, provide stronger evidence than cross‐sectional comparisons. Interventional studies could offer the strongest validation, but only one study in this review met this criterion, 41 and it had a limited sample size. Thus, intervention‐based findings will not be a major focus of this discussion. Two major unresolved challenges emerge from this review. First is the contradictory behavior of α oscillations in AD. Some studies have suggested an initial increase in α power in early disease stages, while others have reported a progressive decline. The second challenge is the non‐linear relationships between electrophysiological biomarkers and Aβ/tau levels. Several studies have reported U‐shaped or inverted U‐shaped relationships between α power, β power, and protein levels. 10 , 12 4.1 Mysteries of α oscillations Alpha oscillations exhibit distinct behaviors at different stages of AD progression, leading to seemingly conflicting findings in the literature. While most studies report reduced α power and synchrony in MCI and AD patients, 7 , 8 , 21 , 47 , 48 , 50 in line with spectral slowing, other studies suggest the opposite pattern: an initial increase in α activity. 11 , 12 , 13 , 53 , 83 , 103 , 104 This raises the possibility that α oscillations may undergo a compensatory increase in the early stages of AD, before declining as the disease advances. The Aβ/tau cascade hypothesis provides a potential framework for understanding this phenomenon. In early AD, rising Aβ levels contribute to an E/I imbalance, leading to cortical disinhibition and increased neuronal excitability. This hyperexcitability could manifest as increased α activity in the initial stages of pathology. As the disease progresses and tau pathology becomes dominant, excitatory neurons are progressively affected, leading to a decline in α and β oscillations. 21 This transition from early hyperactivity to later hypoactivity has been supported by computational modeling, demonstrating that decreased inhibitory synaptic coupling strength and interneuron hyperactivity can produce early neuronal hyperactivity and subsequent spectral slowing. 116 To further investigate this phenomenon, longitudinal studies tracking α dynamics in SCD and MCI populations are needed. A recent study suggested that early increases in α power might be detectable before substantial cognitive decline occurs, emphasizing the importance of monitoring at‐risk populations over time. 104 Beyond tracking α changes over time, it is essential to recognize that α oscillations are not a singular entity but rather a set of spatially distributed networks and oscillators. Different α generators may oscillate at distinct frequencies within the α band, and their behavior could vary across brain regions and disease stages. Several studies have reported posterior α slowing 11 , 13 , 21 and anterior α increases in power and synchrony, 11 , 48 , 54 suggesting that different α networks may be differentially affected by AD pathology. Using high‐density EEG or MEG recordings to localize and differentiate α generators could help resolve these discrepancies. Further supporting this complexity, Moretti et al. demonstrated that MCI and early AD patients may exhibit multiple peaks within the α band, and this multipeak pattern is associated with a higher likelihood of progression to AD. 10 One intriguing possibility is that as AD progresses, different α oscillators fall out of synchrony, leading to reduced power in lower‐ α frequencies and the emergence of multiple α peaks. The underlying mechanism could involve region‐specific differences in cytoarchitecture and vulnerability to Aβ/tau pathology, causing α oscillators in different brain networks to shift in frequency and desynchronize over time. It is also plausible that α oscillations within certain networks may be in different phases of activity. Some brain regions may experience hypoactivity, leading to reduced lower‐ α oscillations, while others may be hyperactive, resulting in increased higher‐ α power. This hypothesis aligns with both empirical EEG data 10 and computational models suggesting that α ‐band oscillations may undergo heterogeneous changes depending on the location and characteristics of the brain network they belong to, as well as disease stage. 116 While the Aβ/tau cascade hypothesis and existing literature provide partial explanations on the mystery of α oscillations in AD, a longitudinal, comprehensive, region‐specific, and time‐dependent investigation of α activity is necessary to achieve a clearer understanding of its role in AD pathology. 4.2 Non‐monotonous dynamics of pathology evolution The non‐monotonous behavior of oscillatory activity in early versus later phases of AD, combined with non‐linear correlations between electrophysiological biomarkers and cortical Aβ deposition 12 and CSF tau levels, 28 underscores the complex and multistage nature of AD pathology. These findings align with the Aβ/tau cascade hypothesis, which proposes that AD evolves in distinct phases: an initial Aβ‐driven phase, followed by tau‐mediated neurodegeneration. Complicating this picture, Aβ and tau levels in CSF exhibit their own non‐monotonous trajectories. In early AD, CSF Aβ levels rise, followed by a decline in Aβ and a corresponding rise in CSF tau, likely coinciding with cortical Aβ deposition. In later stages, tau pathology dominates, with the formation of NFTs. Could this non‐monotonous behavior be explained by an initial rapid increase of Aβ/tau levels and the subsequent plateauing of protein levels as AD progresses? Our review suggests that, until recently, few studies have rigorously documented AD stage in relation to electrophysiological signatures. 104 Fluctuations in Aβ and tau protein levels – and their dynamic interplay – could directly modulate neuronal oscillations through biochemical mechanisms. It is possible that these effects are not solely intrinsic to neurons but may also involve glial cells, which play a crucial role in regulating electrochemical gradients and synapse formation. Dysfunctional glial activity, particularly the failure of astrocytes and microglia to clear toxic protein aggregates, could contribute to excess Aβ and tau accumulation, neuroinflammation, and cell death. 117 This raises an important question: Are oscillatory abnormalities in AD primarily driven by direct Aβ/tau effects on neurons, or do they emerge secondarily through glial‐mediated disruptions? 4.3 Contribution from glial cells AD is a multifaceted disorder that affects the nervous system in diverse and complex ways. Investigating not only neurons but also glial cells, their interaction with neuronal activity, and their role in Aβ/tau pathology is essential for a more comprehensive understanding of the disease. 92 , 117 The correlation between electrophysiological features and metabolism rates (measured by FDG PET) is moderate at best, 17 as FDG PET is not solely a marker of neuronal metabolism – it is a measure of synaptic function 118 , 119 and, thus, sensitive to astrocytic glucose metabolism. 120 These observations highlight the critical need to better understand glial cell changes in AD, their role in Aβ/tau propagation, and how they modulate neuronal oscillations across different brain regions. Astrocytes and microglia play key roles in neuroinflammation, synaptic homeostasis, and the clearance of toxic protein aggregates, and their dysfunction could alter neuronal excitability and disrupt network synchronization, contributing to the oscillatory abnormalities observed in AD. 4.4 Role of computational modeling Several studies have employed NMMs to simulate AD‐related brain dynamics, providing insights into underlying disease mechanisms and validating observed spectral alterations. 116 , 121 , 122 , 123 These models consistently predict an initial phase of neuronal hyperactivity, followed by progressive hypoactivity and diminished neural function, which aligns with empirical findings from EEG/MEG studies. A study by Alexandersen et al. coupled Aβ/tau pathogenesis with axonal degeneration and electrical activity, modeled through NMMs. 122 Their findings suggest that spectral slowing in AD is not primarily due to large‐scale disconnection but rather results from local neurodegeneration of excitatory neurons. This aligns with the Aβ/tau cascade hypothesis. A phenomenon reported by Van Nifterick et al. 116 may provide additional insight into the complex behavior of α oscillations. They showed that when E/I imbalance was enhanced, multiple peaks emerged in the α band, an observation also reported in empirical studies by Moretti et al. 10 This supports the idea that α oscillations may originate from multiple, independent generators, which may be differentially affected by AD pathology, potentially explaining why multiple α peaks appear in the spectra of AD patients. Overall, these computational studies suggest that E/I imbalance may underlie both early hyperactivity and later hypoactivity in AD pathology. 4.5 Effects of Aβ pathogenesis in AD and non‐AD dementia Distinguishing Aβ‐specific effects from AD‐related neuropathological processes and dementia‐related pathology is essential for understanding the role of amyloid pathology in disease progression. This distinction requires larger study samples to achieve statistically meaningful results. Importantly, not all individuals with elevated Aβ levels progress to AD, 11 , 58 further accentuating the need to separate Aβ‐driven changes from those associated with tau pathology and neurodegeneration. Nakamura et al. proposed that α oscillations may be primarily influenced by Aβ pathogenesis rather than AD‐specific neurodegeneration. 11 However, this contrasts with a more recent study by Ranasinghe et al., which found that α oscillations were even more strongly affected by tau deposition than Aβ accumulation. 21 These conflicting findings highlight the complex interplay between Aβ, tau, and electrophysiological changes in AD. A study by Gaubert et al. addressed this issue by dividing participants into four groups based on Aβ status and presence of neurodegeneration and analyzing electrophysiological signatures within each group separately. 12 Their results partially supported Nakamura et al. hypothesis, suggesting that θ ‐band oscillations may be more involved in non‐dementia‐related pathology and possibly serve a compensatory function. 12 , 18 Additionally, α power increased in Aβ+ individuals relative to Aβ− individuals in both HC and MCI groups. 11 This finding aligns with the early compensatory increase in α oscillations discussed in this review. A possible explanation for these results is that Aβ deposition initially drives an increase in α activity in early AD, before tau pathology becomes dominant. As Aβ pathogenesis progresses, tau pathology eventually overtakes Aβ accumulation, leading to widespread neuronal dysfunction and a subsequent decline in α power. This could reconcile the findings of Nakamura et al. (who observed an Aβ‐driven increase in α power) with those of Ranasinghe et al. (who found tau pathology correlated with α decline). 21 These findings emphasize the critical importance of documenting AD stage in research participants, preferably using biofluid measurements or PET imaging of Aβ and tau. The recently updated recommendations from the AA's advocacy for the use of Aβ/tau biomarkers to stratify study populations more effectively, ensuring that electrophysiological changes are contextualized within disease progression. 60 Studies such as those by Nakamura et al. 9 , 11 and Gaubert et al. 12 provide valuable models for incorporating biomarker‐based stratification into electrophysiological research. However, simply including biofluid protein levels is not sufficient. Factors such as individual variability in protein levels over the lifespan and differences in AD progression rates across individuals add another layer of complexity. A more comprehensive approach would involve longitudinal follow‐ups, integrating biofluid 124 , 125 and PET imaging data with electrophysiological measurements, and, when possible, post mortem verification of AD pathology. This may lead to estimating AD stage in individual patients using multimodal biomarkers, similar to recent advances in “brain age” studies. 126 , 127 The ease of blood‐based biomarker collection raises the potential for widespread implementation in longitudinal studies investigating electrophysiological changes in AD and related dementias. As plasma biomarkers continue to advance, combining electrophysiological recordings with plasma‐based markers may offer a scalable, non‐invasive approach to tracking disease progression, staging AD, and refining early detection models. 4.6 Need for longitudinal studies The necessity of longitudinal studies with follow‐ups is indisputable, particularly in addressing the unresolved questions discussed in this review. Many of the findings reviewed here are based on correlational and cross‐sectional analyses, where associations between electrophysiological features and AD pathology are derived from pooled subject populations rather than tracking individual changes over time. The lack of careful staging of AD pathology in many studies further complicates the interpretation and clinical utility of electrophysiological biomarkers. Given the importance of understanding AD stage in biomarker validation, the absence of large‐scale, multimodal, and longitudinal datasets remain a major limitation. Longitudinal studies incorporating cross‐modal imaging, biofluid biomarkers (CSF and plasma Aβ/tau), and electrophysiological recordings could also enhance computational models by integrating multimodal data to simulate Aβ/tau propagation and its effects on neuronal activity. This could lead to developing better models capable of predicting disease progression, testing hypotheses about underlying mechanisms, and refining patient‐specific prognosis assessments. Investing in longitudinal, multimodal research efforts is therefore essential for translating electrophysiological AD biomarkers from correlational findings into clinically useful tools for early detection, disease monitoring, and development of personalized intervention strategies. 4.7 Strengths and limitations of electrophysiological biomarkers The major advantage of electrophysiological biomarkers include: Sensitivity to early changes associated with AD before clinical symptoms manifest. 19 , 24 , 32 , 38 This is essential for developing biomarkers for the early detection of AD. 128 The non‐invasive nature of EEG/MEG recordings, making them suitable for safe repeated application across the population regardless of health status. This contrasts with invasive or higher‐risk procedures that require clinical justification. Widespread availability and cost‐effectiveness of EEG (and increasingly of MEG 75 ) in clinical settings, making them practical tools for longitudinal monitoring of individuals at risk of AD. Current limitations and areas of biomarker research requiring further investigation include: Low specificity of MCI prognosis (progression to AD). 33 , 35 Ambiguity in the direction and magnitude of electrophysiological signatures’ change across different stages of AD progression. This remains a significant challenge for developing reliable prediction and classification algorithms that operate successfully on an individual level. Uncertainty regarding the specificity of certain biomarkers to AD‐related dementia versus other forms of dementia 11 , 12 . 4.8 Suggested future avenues of research Based on the challenges outlined previously, we identify the following research directions as significant topics for advancing our understanding of AD‐related electrophysiological signatures and improving biomarker development. 4.8.1 Longitudinal study designs Longitudinal studies tracking the changes in electrophysiological signatures of individual participants over the course of AD progression (or normal aging) are complex, costly, and, therefore, only slowly emerging. 129 These studies should integrate a variety of biomarkers – particularly amyloid and tau levels from biofluid measurements or PET imaging – to anchor electrophysiological data to underlying neurobiological processes, ultimately enabling the staging of AD with higher accuracy. The recruitment of diverse groups of participants is also essential to capture the natural variability of the population across sex, ethnicity, genetic mutations, and comorbidities specifically pertaining to vascular pathology. Recruiting a “pure” AD cohort is likely infeasible, so screening, classifying, and reporting comorbidities is crucial to achieve the study goals and subsequent analyses. Following the recent AA guidelines, 60 reporting biomarkers of immune/inflammatory mechanisms, vascular pathology, and α ‐synucleinopathy is especially important to distinguish AD‐specific processes from co‐pathologies. Additionally, studies should include a broad range of NPAs beyond conventional neurocognitive tests (such as MMSE and MoCA) to better connect behavioral and cognitive deficits to electrophysiological biomarkers throughout disease progression. 4.8.2 Standardized EEG/MEG protocols Developing and carefully reporting standardized EEG/MEG data acquisition and processing protocols is vital for the clinical translation of electrophysiological biomarkers. While proposing a universal protocol might not be possible at the moment, recommendations from the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology (IFCN) for EEG 130 and MEG 131 provide useful guidance. Electrode/sensor placement and spatial information of measurements Using high‐density EEG setups is preferrable, especially when utilizing source imaging methods to estimate brain activity from scalp measurements. IFCN recommends a 25‐electrode setup with inferior temporal electrodes. Regardless of the electrophysiological measure studied (e.g., spectral power and phase synchrony) it is important to preserve the spatial distribution of the measure rather than averaging it, as EEG and MEG capture spatially rich and brain‐wide dynamics. Therefore, applying source imaging methods to trace back electrophysiological signatures to their source in the brain 100 can yield a better understanding of the location and extent of brain networks involved in AD pathology. The choice of source imaging algorithm impacts the results, and following guidelines suggested by Samuelsson et al. 132 to determine the appropriate method is recommended. Beamforming techniques seem to be an apt choice for resting state data, specifically for MEG. 133 Recording paradigms Resting‐state recordings should ideally include both eyes‐open and eyes‐closed sessions, following best‐practice recommendations such as those outlined in Babiloni et al. 134 The studies included in the present review (Table SI‐SV ) suggest that 3 to 5 min of data recording are typically collected and analyzed. Following Babiloni et al. 128 , 134 and estimates of spectral stability of brain signals, 135 we recommend analyzing 5 to 10 min of eyes open, eyes closed, and possibly 1‐min interleaved sessions of eyes‐open followed by eyes‐closed sessions, to collect a representative sample of various resting‐state dynamics. Epoching schemes Resting‐state data are typically divided into epochs for further analyses, therefore determining the epochs’ length is an important choice. Additionally, the number of epochs chosen for analysis might vary among subjects, as noisy epochs with excessive muscle and movement artifacts must be removed from analysis. The studies included in this review (Tables SI−SV ) are typically 2 to 4 s long. This is an appropriate length for capturing individual signatures of brain activity oscillations above 1 Hz 104 , 135 , 136 but may have to be extended to longer window lengths if slower oscillations (&lt;1 Hz) 137 are to be studied. Preprocessing methods The Autoreject framework 138 provides a robust and automated framework for preprocessing MEG/EEG data. For MEG, deriving signal source projections from empty‐room noise measurements (to remove noise sources with non‐physiological origin) is crucial. 139 A sampling rate of ≥ 500 Hz is also recommended, for capturing γ and higher frequency activity, including fast ripples. 4.8.3 Investigating high‐frequency oscillations While changes of α oscillations as AD progresses need further delineation, the literature 140 reports inconsistent findings regarding changes in γ power. This might stem from the difficulty of removing muscle artifacts and the smaller signal‐to‐noise ratio of higher‐frequency signal components in the electrophysiology. This warrants further investigation into the role, mechanisms, and changes of γ activity as AD progresses, 141 specifically in the context of slow versus high‐ γ activity. 142 Similar to the unsealed fate of γ activity as a potential AD biomarker, the higher‐frequency components of electrophysiological recordings remain underexplored. Interest is growing, however, in the prospects of these oscillations (&gt;80 Hz) being reliable biomarkers of AD, 143 both in cases co‐pathologized with and independent of epilepsy. 144 , 145 4.8.4 Multimodal computational modeling Macro/mesoscale neural mass models that simulate the interactions between protein pathology and electrophysiology 122 , 123 can lead to better predictions of how the electrophysiological signatures of AD might evolve over the course of the disease, as protein depositions accumulate in the cortex, for distinguishing AD from MCI or HCs and predicting patient prognosis. 146 4.9 Concluding remarks This review aligns with the prevailing view in the literature that non‐invasive electrophysiological biomarkers (EEG/MEG) hold significant promise for detecting and monitoring AD progression. The electrophysiological signatures of AD have been consistently shown to correlate with NPA scores and cognitive status, Aβ and tau levels (measured from biofluids and PET scans), FDG PET metabolism, and other structural and functional imaging findings. These biomarkers have demonstrated strong classification capabilities in distinguishing HC from MCI and AD patients and have even been shown to predict AD progression at early disease stages, before structural atrophy, metabolic decline, or major cognitive impairment manifest. In addition to their diagnostic and prognostic utility, EEG/MEG biomarkers offer a practical advantage over many other AD biomarkers due to their greater accessibility and lower cost. MEG enables high‐density recordings with minimal prerecording preparation, unlike high‐density EEG. Emerging technologies such as OPMs 74 , 75 , 76 could further democratize access to MEG technology, bringing it closer to widespread clinical adoption. Moreover, EEG/MEG are particularly well suited for repeated assessments, an important advantage given the increasing difficulty AD patients face in remaining motionless for extended periods during PET or MRI scans, as both cognitive and motor functions deteriorate over time. Despite these promising insights, critical unanswered questions remain, particularly regarding the non‐monotonous dynamics of electrophysiological biomarkers across different stages of AD progression. The complexity of how oscillatory activity evolves over time, especially in relation to Aβ/tau interactions and disease staging, emphasizes the need for careful interpretation of electrophysiological markers. Efforts to design robust AD biomarkers must account for the underlying neurobiological processes that drive electrophysiological alterations, rather than relying solely on data‐driven classification models. Ultimately, no amount of amassed data or ML models, if divorced from neurobiological principles, can substitute for a well‐informed researcher. A data‐driven approach must be complemented by deep domain knowledge to ensure that electrophysiological biomarkers are interpreted correctly, used effectively, and ultimately translated into meaningful clinical applications. The future of EEG/MEG‐based AD diagnostics will depend not only on expanding datasets but also on thoughtful integration of multimodal insights, computational modeling, and a fundamental understanding of AD pathophysiology. 5 LIMITATIONS Most studies reviewed herein relied on neurocognitive tests such as MMSE and MoCA, overlooking more specific NPAs (e.g., executive function, verbal fluency, motor skills, auditory/verbal learning, verbal memory, processing speed, and Stroop effects). Even though Wiesman et al. 18 , 20 examined a wide range of NPAs, and significant results on verbal memory and processing speed were discussed in this review, we focused on neurocognitive tests due to the present literature's bias. Notably, studies by Yan et al. 44 and Hoshi et al. 52 included a wider range of NPAs such as Stroop (color word) tests and frontal assessment battery tests in relatively large samples. As suggested earlier, inclusion of a more comprehensive battery of NPAs encompassing various dimensions of cognitive decline and behavioral changes due to AD should be carefully considered. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT Henrik Zetterberg has served on scientific advisory boards and/or as a consultant for AbbVie, Acumen, Alector, Alzinova, ALZpath, Amylyx, Annexon, Apellis, Artery Therapeutics, AZTherapies, Cognito Therapeutics, CogRx, Denali, Eisai, LabCorp, Merry Life, Nervgen, Novo Nordisk, Optoceutics, Passage Bio, Pinteon Therapeutics, Prothena, Quanterix, Red Abbey Labs, reMYND, Roche, Samumed, Siemens Healthineers, Triplet Therapeutics, and Wave, has given lectures sponsored by Alzecure, BioArctic, Biogen, Cellectricon, Fujirebio, Lilly, Novo Nordisk, Roche, and WebMD, and is a co‐founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program (outside submitted work). Sheraz Khan is employed by and holds a position in Pfizer Inc. and holds stock in the company. The rest of the authors (Abbas Sohrabpour, Darko Sarovic, Matti S. Hämäläinen, and Sylvain Baillet) have no relevant conflicts of interest to report. Author disclosures are available in the Supporting Information . Supporting information Supporting Information Supporting Information ACKNOWLEDGMENT Abbas Sohrabpour gratefully acknowledges the support from the David Cohen (DC) Biomagnetism Fellowship. Henrik Zetterberg is a Wallenberg Scholar and a Distinguished Professor at the Swedish Research Council supported by grants from the Swedish Research Council (2023‐00356, 2022‐01018, and 2019‐02397), the European Union's Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Programme under Grant Agreement No. 101053962, Swedish State Support for Clinical Research (ALFGBG‐71320), the Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation (ADDF), USA (201809‐2016862), the AD Strategic Fund and the AA (ADSF‐21‐831376‐C, ADSF‐21‐831381‐C, ADSF‐21‐831377‐C, and ADSF‐24‐1284328‐C), the European Partnership on Metrology, co‐financed by the European Union's Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Programme and by the Participating States (NEuroBioStand, 22HLT07), the Bluefield Project, Cure Alzheimer's Fund, the Olav Thon Foundation, the Erling‐Persson Family Foundation, Familjen Rönströms Stiftelse, Stiftelsen för Gamla Tjänarinnor, Hjärnfonden, Sweden (FO2022‐0270), the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under the Marie Skłodowska‐Curie Grant Agreement No. 860197 (MIRIADE), the European Union Joint Programme–Neurodegenerative Disease Research (JPND2021‐00694), the National Institute for Health and Care Research University College London (UCL) Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre, and the UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL (UKDRI‐1003). Matti S. Hämäläinen is supported by the United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) (grant R01NS104585). Sylvain Baillet is supported by the NIH (R01EB026299‐05), the Tier‐1 CIHR Canada Research Chair of Neural Dynamics of Brain Systems (CRC‐2017‐00311), and a Discovery Grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (436355‐13), the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (202503‐PJT‐542788) and the Canada Brain Research Fund (CBRF), and innovative arrangement between the Government of Canada (through Health Canada) and Brain Canada Foundation, and Alzheimer's Association. This study was not directly supported by any funding source. The authors have gratefully acknowledged the support they individually received in the acknowledgements section. REFERENCES 1 Prince MJ , Wimo A , Guerchet MM , Ali GC , Wu YT , Prina M . World Alzheimer Report 2015 ‐ The Global Impact of Dementia: An Analysis of Prevalence, Incidence, Cost and Trends . Alzheimer's Disease International (ADI) ; 2015 . Published online August 2015. Accessed February 21, 2022. https://www.alzint.org/u/WorldAlzheimerReport2015.pdf 2 Zissimopoulos J , Crimmins E , St Clair P . The value of delaying Alzheimer's disease onset . Forum Health Econ Policy . 2015 ; 18 ( 1 ): 25 – 39 . doi: 10.1515/fhep-2014-0013 PMC4851168 27134606 3 Jia J , Wei C , Chen S , et al. The cost of Alzheimer's disease in China and re‐estimation of costs worldwide . Alzheimers Dement . 2018 ; 14 ( 4 ): 483 – 491 . doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.12.006 29433981 4 Cimler R , Maresova P , Kuhnova J , Kuca K . Predictions of Alzheimer's disease treatment and care costs in European countries . PLoS One . 2019 ; 14 ( 1 ): e0210958 . doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210958 30682120 PMC6347248 5 Clay E , Zhou J , Yi ZM , Zhai S , Toumi M . Economic burden for Alzheimer's disease in China from 2010 to 2050: a modelling study . J Mark Access Health Policy . 2019 ; 7 ( 1 ): 1667195 . doi: 10.1080/20016689.2019.1667195 31595183 PMC6764338 6 Tahami Monfared AA , Byrnes MJ , White LA , Zhang Q . The humanistic and economic burden of Alzheimer's disease . Neurol Ther . 2022 ; 11 ( 2 ): 525 – 551 . doi: 10.1007/s40120-022-00335-x 35192176 PMC9095804 7 Szelies B , Grond M , Herholz K , Kessler J , Wullen T , Heiss WD . Quantitative EEG mapping and PET in Alzheimer's disease . J Neurol Sci . 1992 ; 110 ( 1 ): 46 – 56 . doi: 10.1016/0022-510X(92)90008-9 1506868 8 Babiloni C , Del Percio C , Caroli A , et al. Cortical sources of resting state EEG rhythms are related to brain hypometabolism in subjects with Alzheimer's disease: an EEG‐PET study . Neurobiol Aging . 2016 ; 48 : 122 – 134 . doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2016.08.021 27668356 9 Nakamura A , Cuesta P , Kato T , et al. Early functional network alterations in asymptomatic elders at risk for Alzheimer's disease . Sci Rep . 2017 ; 7 ( 1 ): 6517 – 6517 . doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-06876-8 28747760 PMC5529571 10 Moretti DV , Pievani M , Pini L , Guerra UP , Paghera B , Frisoni GB . Cerebral PET glucose hypometabolism in subjects with mild cognitive impairment and higher EEG high‐alpha/low‐alpha frequency power ratio . Neurobiol Aging . 2017 ; 58 : 213 – 224 . doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.06.009 28755648 11 Nakamura A , Cuesta P , Fernández A , et al. Electromagnetic signatures of the preclinical and prodromal stages of Alzheimer's disease . Brain . 2018 ; 141 ( 5 ): 1470 – 1485 . doi: 10.1093/brain/awy044 29522156 PMC5920328 12 Gaubert S , Raimondo F , Houot M , et al. EEG evidence of compensatory mechanisms in preclinical Alzheimer's disease . Brain . 2019 ; 142 ( 7 ): 2096 – 2112 . doi: 10.1093/brain/awz150 31211359 13 Babiloni C , Lopez S , Del Percio C , et al. Resting‐state posterior alpha rhythms are abnormal in subjective memory complaint seniors with preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology and high education level: the INSIGHT‐preAD study . Neurobiol Aging . 2020 ; 90 : 43 – 59 . doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.01.012 32111391 14 Ranasinghe KG , Cha J , Iaccarino L , et al. Neurophysiological signatures in Alzheimer's disease are distinctly associated with tau, amyloid‐β accumulation, and cognitive decline . Sci Transl Med . 2020 ; 12 ( 534 ): eaaz4069 . doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz4069 32161102 PMC7138514 15 Kocagoncu E , Quinn A , Firouzian A , et al. Tau pathology in early Alzheimer's disease is linked to selective disruptions in neurophysiological network dynamics . Neurobiol Aging . 2020 ; 92 : 141 – 152 . doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.03.009 32280029 PMC7269692 16 Tanabe S , Bo A , White M , et al. Cohort study of electroencephalography markers of amyloid‐tau‐neurodegeneration pathology . Brain Commun . 2020 ; 2 ( 2 ): fcaa099 . doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaa099 32954343 PMC7475697 17 Smailovic U , Koenig T , Savitcheva I , et al. Regional disconnection in Alzheimer dementia and amyloid‐positive mild cognitive impairment: association between EEG functional connectivity and brain glucose metabolism . Brain Connect . 2020 ; 10 ( 10 ): 555 – 565 . doi: 10.1089/brain.2020.0785 33073602 PMC7757561 18 Wiesman AI , Murman DL , May PE , et al. Spatio‐spectral relationships between pathological neural dynamics and cognitive impairment along the Alzheimer's disease spectrum . Alzheimers Dement (Amst) . 2021 ; 13 ( 1 ): e12200 . doi: 10.1002/dad2.12200 34095434 PMC8165730 19 Gaubert S , Houot M , Raimondo F , et al. A machine learning approach to screen for preclinical Alzheimer's disease . Neurobiol Aging . 2021 ; 105 : 205 – 216 . doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.04.024 34102381 20 Wiesman AI , Murman DL , Losh RA , et al. Spatially resolved neural slowing predicts impairment and amyloid burden in Alzheimer's disease . Brain . 2022 ; 145 ( 6 ): 2177 – 2189 . doi: 10.1093/brain/awab430 35088842 PMC9246709 21 Ranasinghe KG , Verma P , Cai C , et al. Altered excitatory and inhibitory neuronal subpopulation parameters are distinctly associated with tau and amyloid in Alzheimer's disease . eLife . 2022 ; 11 : e77850 . doi: 10.7554/eLife.77850 35616532 PMC9217132 22 Schoonhoven DN , Coomans EM , Millán AP , et al. Tau protein spreads through functionally connected neurons in Alzheimer's disease: a combined MEG/PET study . Brain . 2023 ; 146 ( 10 ): 4040 – 4054 . doi: 10.1093/brain/awad189 37279597 PMC10545627 23 Flores‐Sandoval AA , Davila‐Pérez P , Buss SS , et al. Spectral power ratio as a measure of EEG changes in mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer's disease: a case‐control study . Neurobiol Aging . 2023 ; 130 : 50 – 60 . doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2023.05.010 37459658 PMC10614059 24 Kim NH , Park U , Yang DW , Choi SH , Youn YC , Kang SW . PET‐validated EEG‐machine learning algorithm predicts brain amyloid pathology in pre‐dementia Alzheimer's disease . Sci Rep . 2023 ; 13 ( 1 ): 10299 . doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-36713-0 37365198 PMC10293163 25 Kudo K , Ranasinghe KG , Morise H , et al. Neurophysiological trajectories in Alzheimer's disease progression . eLife . 2024 ; 12 : RP91044 . doi: 10.7554/eLife.91044 38546337 PMC10977971 26 Nencha U , Rigoni I , Ribaldi F , et al. Alterations in gamma frequency oscillations correlate with cortical tau deposition in Alzheimer's disease . Neurobiol Aging . 2024 ; 139 : 1 – 4 . doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2024.03.008 38574424 27 Gonzalez‐Escamilla G , Atienza M , Garcia‐Solis D , Cantero JL . Cerebral and blood correlates of reduced functional connectivity in mild cognitive impairment . Brain Struct Funct . 2016 ; 221 ( 1 ): 631 – 645 . doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0930-6 25366971 28 Jelic V , Blomberg M , Dierks T , et al. EEG slowing and cerebrospinal fluid tau levels in patients with cognitive decline . Neuroreport . 1998 ; 9 ( 1 ): 157 . 9592068 10.1097/00001756-199801050-00032 29 Kramberger MG , Kåreholt I , Andersson T , Winblad B , Eriksdotter M , Jelic V . Association between EEG abnormalities and CSF biomarkers in a memory clinic cohort . Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord . 2013 ; 36 ( 5‐6 ): 319 – 328 . doi: 10.1159/000351677 24022277 30 Canuet L , Pusil S , López ME , et al. Network disruption and cerebrospinal fluid amyloid‐β and phospho‐tau levels in mild cognitive impairment . J Neurosci . 2015 ; 35 ( 28 ): 10325 – 10330 . doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0704-15.2015 26180207 PMC6605340 31 Hata M , Tanaka T , Kazui H , et al. Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease correlate with electroencephalography parameters assessed by exact low‐resolution electromagnetic tomography (eLORETA) . Clin EEG Neurosci . 2017 ; 48 ( 5 ): 338 – 347 . doi: 10.1177/1550059416662119 27515698 32 Ferreira D , Jelic V , Cavallin L , et al. Electroencephalography is a good complement to currently established dementia biomarkers . Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord . 2016 ; 42 ( 1‐2 ): 80 – 92 . doi: 10.1159/000448394 27595479 33 Gouw AA , Alsema AM , Tijms BM , et al. EEG spectral analysis as a putative early prognostic biomarker in nondemented, amyloid positive subjects . Neurobiol Aging . 2017 ; 57 : 133 – 142 . doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.05.017 28646686 34 Smailovic U , Koenig T , Kåreholt I , et al. Quantitative EEG power and synchronization correlate with Alzheimer's disease CSF biomarkers . Neurobiol Aging . 2018 ; 63 : 88 – 95 . doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.11.005 29245058 35 Schjønning Nielsen M , Simonsen AH , Siersma V , et al. Quantitative electroencephalography analyzed by statistical pattern recognition as a diagnostic and prognostic tool in mild cognitive impairment: results from a Nordic Multicenter Cohort Study . Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra . 2018 ; 8 ( 3 ): 426 – 438 . doi: 10.1159/000490788 30631335 PMC6323395 36 Musaeus CS , Nielsen MS , Høgh P . Altered low‐frequency EEG connectivity in mild cognitive impairment as a sign of clinical progression . J Alzheimers Dis . 2019 ; 68 ( 3 ): 947 – 960 . doi: 10.3233/JAD-181081 30883355 37 Smailovic U , Koenig T , Laukka EJ , et al. EEG time signature in Alzheimer´s disease: functional brain networks falling apart . Neuroimage Clin . 2019 ; 24 : 102046 . doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.102046 31795039 PMC6909352 38 Briels CT , Stam CJ , Scheltens P , Gouw AA . The predictive value of normal EEGs in dementia due to Alzheimer's disease . Ann Clin Transl Neurol . 2021 ; 8 ( 5 ): 1038 – 1048 . doi: 10.1002/acn3.51339 33835723 PMC8108419 39 Babiloni C , Noce G , Ferri R , et al. Resting state alpha electroencephalographic rhythms are affected by sex in cognitively unimpaired seniors and patients with Alzheimer's disease and amnesic mild cognitive impairment: a Retrospective and Exploratory Study . Cereb Cortex . 2022 ; 32 ( 10 ): 2197 – 2215 . doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhab348 34613369 40 Smailovic U , Ferreira D , Ausén B , et al. Decreased electroencephalography global field synchronization in slow‐frequency bands characterizes synaptic dysfunction in amnestic subtypes of mild cognitive impairment . Front Aging Neurosci . 2022 ; 14 : 755454 . doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.755454 35462693 PMC9031731 41 Eyjolfsdottir H , Koenig T , Karami A , et al. Fast Alpha activity in EEG of Patients with Alzheimer's disease is paralleled by changes in cognition and cholinergic markers during encapsulated cell biodelivery of nerve growth factor . Front Aging Neurosci . 2022 ; 14 : 756687 . doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.756687 35557841 PMC9085576 42 Sun J , Xie Z , Sun Y , et al. Precise prediction of cerebrospinal fluid amyloid beta protein for early Alzheimer's disease detection using multimodal data . MedComm . 2024 ; 5 ( 5 ): e532 . doi: 10.1002/mco2.532 38645663 PMC11027992 43 García‐Colomo A , Nebreda A , Carrasco‐Gómez M , et al. Longitudinal changes in the functional connectivity of individuals at risk of Alzheimer's disease . GeroScience . 2024 ; 46 ( 3 ): 2989 – 3003 . doi: 10.1007/s11357-023-01036-5 38172488 PMC11009204 44 Yan Y , Gao M , Geng Z , et al. Abnormal EEG microstates in Alzheimer's disease: predictors of β‐amyloid deposition degree and disease classification . GeroScience . 2024 ; 46 ( 5 ): 4779 – 4792 . Published online May 10, 2024. doi: 10.1007/s11357-024-01181-5 38727873 PMC11336126 45 Gonzalez‐Escamilla G , Atienza M , Cantero JL . Impaired cortical oscillatory coupling in mild cognitive impairment: anatomical substrate and ApoE4 effects . Brain Struct Funct . 2015 ; 220 ( 3 ): 1721 – 1737 . doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0757-1 24682246 46 Wszolek ZK , Herkes GK , Lagerlund TD , Kokmen E . Comparison of EEG background frequency analysis, psychologic test scores, short test of mental status, and quantitative SPECT in dementia . J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol . 1992 ; 5 ( 1 ): 22 – 30 . doi: 10.1177/002383099200500104 1571070 47 Passero S , Rocchi R , Vatti G , Burgalassi L , Battistini N . Quantitative EEG mapping, regional cerebral blood flow, and neuropsychological function in Alzheimer's disease . Dementia . 1995 ; 6 ( 3 ): 148 – 156 . doi: 10.1159/000106938 7620527 48 Müller TJ , Thome J , Chiaramonti R , et al. A comparison of qEEG and HMPAO‐SPECT in relation to the clinical severity of Alzheimer's disease . Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Nuerosci . 1997 ; 247 ( 5 ): 259 – 263 . doi: 10.1007/BF02900304 9444495 49 Rodriguez G , Nobili F , Copello F , et al. 99mTc‐HMPAO regional cerebral blood flow and quantitative electroencephalography in Alzheimer's disease: a Correlative Study . J Nucl Med . 1999 ; 40 ( 4 ): 522 – 529 . 10210209 50 Jelic V , Johansson SE , Almkvist O , et al. Quantitative electroencephalography in mild cognitive impairment: longitudinal changes and possible prediction of Alzheimer's disease . Neurobiol Aging . 2000 ; 21 ( 4 ): 533 – 540 . doi: 10.1016/S0197-4580(00)00153-6 10924766 51 Rodriguez G , Vitali P , Canfora M , et al. Quantitative EEG and perfusional single photon emission computed tomography correlation during long‐term donepezil therapy in Alzheimer's disease . Clin Neurophysiol . 2004 ; 115 ( 1 ): 39 – 49 . doi: 10.1016/S1388-2457(03)00321-3 14706467 52 Hoshi H , Hirata Y , Fukasawa K , Kobayashi M , Shigihara Y . Oscillatory characteristics of resting‐state magnetoencephalography reflect pathological and symptomatic conditions of cognitive impairment . Front Aging Neurosci . 2024 ; 16 : 1273738 . doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1273738 38352236 PMC10861731 53 Ranasinghe KG , Petersen C , Kudo K , et al. Reduced synchrony in alpha oscillations during life predicts post mortem neurofibrillary tangle density in early‐onset and atypical Alzheimer's disease . Alzheimer's Dement . 2021 ; 17 ( 12 ): 2009 – 2019 . doi: 10.1002/alz.12349 33884753 PMC8528895 54 Teipel SJ , Brüggen K , Temp AGM , Jakobi K , Weber MA , Berger C . Simultaneous assessment of electroencephalography microstates and resting state intrinsic networks in Alzheimer's disease and healthy aging . Front Neurol . 2021 ; 12 : 637542 . doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.637542 34220668 PMC8249002 55 Lopez S , Hampel H , Chiesa PA , et al. The association between posterior resting‐state EEG alpha rhythms and functional MRI connectivity in older adults with subjective memory complaint . Neurobiol Aging . 2024 ; 137 : 62 – 77 . doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2024.02.008 38431999 56 Baillet S . Magnetoencephalography for brain electrophysiology and imaging . Nat Neurosci . 2017 ; 20 ( 3 ): 327 – 339 . 28230841 10.1038/nn.4504 57 Morris JC . Early‐stage and preclinical Alzheimer disease . Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord . 2005 ; 19 ( 3 ): 163 . doi: 10.1097/01.wad.0000184005.22611.cc 16118535 58 Sperling RA , Aisen PS , Beckett LA , et al. Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer's disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging‐Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease . Alzheimers Dement . 2011 ; 7 ( 3 ): 280 – 292 . doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.003 21514248 PMC3220946 59 Dubois B , Hampel H , Feldman HH , et al. Preclinical Alzheimer's disease: definition, natural history, and diagnostic criteria . Alzheimers Dement . 2016 ; 12 ( 3 ): 292 – 323 . doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.02.002 27012484 PMC6417794 60 Jack CR , Jr. , Andrews JS , Beach TG , et al. Revised criteria for diagnosis and staging of Alzheimer's disease: Alzheimer's Association Workgroup . Alzheimers Dement . 2024 ; 20 ( 8 ): 5143 – 5169 . doi: 10.1002/alz.13859 38934362 PMC11350039 61 Colom‐Cadena M , Spires‐Jones T , Zetterberg H , et al. The clinical promise of biomarkers of synapse damage or loss in Alzheimer's disease . Alz Res Ther . 2020 ; 12 ( 1 ): 21 . doi: 10.1186/s13195-020-00588-4 PMC7053087 32122400 62 Frisoni GB , Fox NC , Jack CR , Scheltens P , Thompson PM . The clinical use of structural MRI in Alzheimer disease . Nat Rev Neurol . 2010 ; 6 ( 2 ): 67 – 77 . doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2009.215 20139996 PMC2938772 63 Tondelli M , Wilcock GK , Nichelli P , De Jager CA , Jenkinson M , Zamboni G . Structural MRI changes detectable up to 10 years before clinical Alzheimer's disease . Neurobiol Aging . 2012 ; 33 ( 4 ): 825 . e25‐e36. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.05.018 21782287 64 Jack CR , Knopman DS , Jagust WJ , et al. Tracking pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer's disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers . Lancet Neurol . 2013 ; 12 ( 2 ): 207 – 216 . doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70291-0 23332364 PMC3622225 65 Jack CR , Jr. , Bennett DA , Blennow K , et al. NIA‐AA Research Framework: toward a biological definition of Alzheimer's disease . Alzheimers Dement . 2018 ; 14 ( 4 ): 535 – 562 . doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.02.018 29653606 PMC5958625 66 Doecke JD , Pérez‐Grijalba V , Fandos N , et al. Total Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio in plasma predicts amyloid‐PET status, independent of clinical AD diagnosis . Neurology . 2020 ; 94 ( 15 ): e1580 – e1591 . doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000009240 32179698 PMC7251518 67 Karikari TK , Ashton NJ , Brinkmalm G , et al. Blood phospho‐tau in Alzheimer disease: analysis, interpretation, and clinical utility . Nat Rev Neurol . 2022 ; 18 ( 7 ): 400 – 418 . doi: 10.1038/s41582-022-00665-2 35585226 68 Selkoe DJ , Hardy J . The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease at 25 years . EMBO Mol Med . 2016 ; 8 ( 6 ): 595 – 608 . doi: 10.15252/emmm.201606210 27025652 PMC4888851 69 Ornish D , Madison C , Kivipelto M , et al. Effects of intensive lifestyle changes on the progression of mild cognitive impairment or early dementia due to Alzheimer's disease: a randomized, controlled clinical trial . Alz Res Ther . 2024 ; 16 ( 1 ): 122 . doi: 10.1186/s13195-024-01482-z PMC11157928 38849944 70 Dumas A , Destrebecq F , Esposito G , Suchonova D , Steen Frederiksen K . Rethinking the detection and diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: outcomes of a European Brain Council project . Aging Brain . 2023 ; 4 : 100093 . doi: 10.1016/j.nbas.2023.100093 37692977 PMC10483037 71 Maestú F , Cuesta P , Hasan O , et al. The importance of the validation of M/EEG with current biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease . Front Hum Neurosci . 2019 ; 13 : 17 . doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00017 30792632 PMC6374629 72 Xu M , Sanz DL , Garces P , Maestu F , Li Q , Pantazis D . A graph Gaussian embedding method for predicting Alzheimer's disease progression with MEG brain networks . IEEE Trans Biomed Eng . 2021 ; 68 ( 5 ): 1579 – 1588 . doi: 10.1109/TBME.2021.3049199 33400645 PMC8162933 73 Vaghari D , Kabir E , Henson RN . Late combination shows that MEG adds to MRI in classifying MCI versus controls . Neuroimage . 2022 ; 252 : 119054 . doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119054 35247546 PMC8987738 74 Tierney TM , Holmes N , Mellor S , et al. Optically pumped magnetometers: from quantum origins to multi‐channel magnetoencephalography . Neuroimage . 2019 ; 199 : 598 – 608 . doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.05.063 31141737 PMC6988110 75 Brookes MJ , Leggett J , Rea M , et al. Magnetoencephalography with optically pumped magnetometers (OPM‐MEG): the next generation of functional neuroimaging . Trends Neurosci . 2022 ; 45 ( 8 ): 621 – 634 . doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2022.05.008 35779970 PMC10465236 76 Alem O , Hughes KJ , Buard I , et al. An integrated full‐head OPM‐MEG system based on 128 zero‐field sensors . Front Neurosci . 2023 ; 17 : 1190310 . doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1190310 37389367 PMC10303922 77 D'Amelio M , Rossini PM . Brain excitability and connectivity of neuronal assemblies in Alzheimer's disease: from animal models to human findings . Prog Neurobiol . 2012 ; 99 ( 1 ): 42 – 60 . doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.07.001 22789698 78 Villemagne VL , Burnham S , Bourgeat P , et al. Amyloid‐β deposition, neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline in sporadic Alzheimer's disease: a prospective cohort study . Lancet Neurol . 2013 ; 12 ( 4 ): 357 – 367 . doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70044-9 23477989 79 Schmitt HP . Neuro‐modulation, aminergic neuro‐disinhibition and neuro‐degeneration.: draft of a comprehensive theory for Alzheimer disease . Med Hypotheses . 2005 ; 65 ( 6 ): 1106 – 1119 . doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2005.06.018 16125326 80 Olney JW , Wozniak DF , Farber NB . Excitotoxic neurodegeneration in Alzheimer disease: new hypothesis and new therapeutic strategies . Arch Neurol . 1997 ; 54 ( 10 ): 1234 – 1240 . doi: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550220042012 9341569 81 Palop JJ , Mucke L . Epilepsy and cognitive impairments in Alzheimer disease . Arch Neurol . 2009 ; 66 ( 4 ): 435 – 440 . doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.15 19204149 PMC2812914 82 Busche MA , Konnerth A . Impairments of neural circuit function in Alzheimer's disease . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci . 2016 ; 371 ( 1700 ): 20150429 . doi: 10.1098/rstb.2015.0429 27377723 PMC4938029 83 Ramírez‐Toraño F , Bruña R , de Frutos‐Lucas J , et al. Functional connectivity hypersynchronization in relatives of Alzheimer's disease patients: an early E/I balance dysfunction? Cereb Cortex . 2021 ; 31 ( 2 ): 1201 – 1210 . doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhaa286 33108468 84 Schultz AP , Chhatwal JP , Hedden T , et al. Phases of hyperconnectivity and hypoconnectivity in the default mode and salience networks track with amyloid and tau in clinically normal individuals . J Neurosci . 2017 ; 37 ( 16 ): 4323 – 4331 . doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3263-16.2017 28314821 PMC5413178 85 Riekkinen P , Sirviö J , Riekkinen P . Relationship between the cortical choline acetyltransferase content and EEG delta‐power . Neurosci Res . 1990 ; 8 ( 1 ): 12 – 20 . doi: 10.1016/0168-0102(90)90052-G 2163045 86 Vaucher E , Aumont N , Pearson D , Rowe W , Poirier J , Kar S . Amyloid‐β peptide levels and its effects on hippocampal acetylcholine release in aged, cognitively‐impaired and ‐unimpaired rats . J Chem Neuroanat . 2001 ; 21 ( 4 ): 323 – 329 . doi: 10.1016/S0891-0618(01)00120-X 11429273 87 Hoshi M , Takashima A , Murayama M , et al. Nontoxic amyloid‐β peptide1‐42 suppresses acetylcholine synthesis: possible role in cholinergic dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease . J Biol Chem . 1997 ; 272 ( 4 ): 2038 – 2041 . doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.4.2038 8999897 88 Oh J , Eser RA , Ehrenberg AJ , et al. Profound degeneration of wake‐promoting neurons in Alzheimer's disease . Alzheimers Dement . 2019 ; 15 ( 10 ): 1253 – 1263 . doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2019.06.3916 31416793 PMC6801040 89 Lewis LD . The interconnected causes and consequences of sleep in the brain . Science . 2021 ; 374 ( 6567 ): 564 – 568 . doi: 10.1126/science.abi8375 34709917 PMC8815779 90 Sabia S , Fayosse A , Dumurgier J , et al. Association of sleep duration in middle and old age with incidence of dementia . Nat Commun . 2021 ; 12 ( 1 ): 2289 . doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-22354-2 33879784 PMC8058039 91 Lucey BP , McCullough A , Landsness EC , et al. Reduced non–rapid eye movement sleep is associated with tau pathology in early Alzheimer's disease . Sci Transl Med . 2019 ; 11 ( 474 ): eaau6550 . doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aau6550 30626715 PMC6342564 92 Zhang H , Wei W , Zhao M , et al. Interaction between Aβ and tau in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease . Int J Biol Sci . 2021 ; 17 ( 9 ): 2181 – 2192 . doi: 10.7150/ijbs.57078 34239348 PMC8241728 93 Agarwal M , Alam MR , Haider MK , Malik MZ , Kim DK . Alzheimer's disease: an overview of major hypotheses and therapeutic options in nanotechnology . Nanomaterials . 2021 ; 11 ( 1 ): 59 . doi: 10.3390/nano11010059 PMC7823376 33383712 94 Hulbert S , Adeli H . EEG/MEG‐ and imaging‐based diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease . Rev Neurosci . 2013 ; 24 ( 6 ): 563 – 576 . doi: 10.1515/revneuro-2013-0042 24259242 95 Engels MMA , van der Flier WM , van der Flier WM , et al. Alzheimer's disease: the state of the art in resting‐state magnetoencephalography . Clin Neurophysiol . 2017 ; 128 ( 8 ): 1426 – 1437 . doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2017.05.012 28622527 96 Yang S , Sanchez Bornot JM , Wong‐Lin K , Prasad G . M/EEG‐based bio‐markers to predict the MCI and Alzheimer's disease: a review from the ML perspective . IEEE Trans Biomed Eng . 2019 ; 66 ( 10 ): 2924 – 2935 . doi: 10.1109/tbme.2019.2898871 30762522 97 Engels MMA , van der Flier WM , van der Flier WM , et al. Alzheimer's disease: the state of the art in resting‐state magnetoencephalography . Clin Neurophysiol . 2017 ; 128 ( 8 ): 1426 – 1437 . doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2017.05.012 28622527 98 Buzsáki G . Rhythms of the Brain . Oxford University Press ; 2006 . 99 Myrov V , Siebenhühner F , Juvonen JJ , Arnulfo G , Palva S , Palva JM . Rhythmicity of neuronal oscillations delineates their cortical and spectral architecture . Commun Biol . 2024 ; 7 ( 1 ): 1 – 18 . doi: 10.1038/s42003-024-06083-y 38570628 PMC10991572 100 He B , Sohrabpour A , Brown E , Liu Z . Electrophysiological source imaging: a noninvasive window to brain dynamics . Annu Rev Biomed Eng . 2018 ; 20 ( 1 ): 171 – 196 . 29494213 10.1146/annurev-bioeng-062117-120853 PMC7941524 101 Puce A , Hämäläinen MS . A review of issues related to data acquisition and analysis in EEG/MEG studies . Brain Sci . 2017 ; 7 ( 6 ): 58 . doi: 10.3390/brainsci7060058 28561761 PMC5483631 102 Salmelin R , Baillet S . Electromagnetic brain imaging . Hum Brain Mapp . 2009 ; 30 ( 6 ): 1753 – 1757 . doi: 10.1002/hbm.20795 19378271 PMC6870961 103 Pusil S , López ME , Cuesta P , Bruña R , Pereda E , Maestú F . Hypersynchronization in mild cognitive impairment: the ‘X’ model . Brain . 2019 ; 142 ( 12 ): 3936 – 3950 . doi: 10.1093/brain/awz320 31633176 104 Gallego‐Rudolf J , Wiesman AI , Pichet Binette A , Villeneuve S , Baillet S . Synergistic association of Aβ and tau pathology with cortical neurophysiology and cognitive decline in asymptomatic older adults . Nat Neurosci . 2024 ; 27 ( 11 ): 2130 – 2137 . Published online September 18, 2024:1‐8. doi: 10.1038/s41593-024-01763-8 39294489 PMC11537964 105 Sadaghiani S , Brookes MJ , Baillet S . Connectomics of human electrophysiology . Neuroimage . 2022 ; 247 : 118788 . doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118788 34906715 PMC8943906 106 Nunez PL , Srinivasan R , Westdorp AF , et al. EEG coherency. I: statistics, reference electrode, volume conduction, Laplacians, cortical imaging, and interpretation at multiple scales . Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol . 1997 ; 103 ( 5 ): 499 – 515 . 9402881 10.1016/s0013-4694(97)00066-7 107 Guggisberg AG , Honma SM , Findlay AM , et al. Mapping functional connectivity in patients with brain lesions . Ann Neurol . 2008 ; 63 ( 2 ): 193 – 203 . doi: 10.1002/ana.21224 17894381 PMC3646715 108 Pearson K . Note on regression and inheritance in the case of two parents . Proc R Soc Lond Ser I . 1895 ; 58 : 240 – 242 . 109 Brookes MJ , Gibson AM , Hall SD , et al. A general linear model for MEG beamformer imaging . Neuroimage . 2004 ; 23 ( 3 ): 936 – 946 . doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.06.031 15528094 110 Colclough GL , Woolrich MW , Tewarie P , et al. How reliable are MEG resting‐state connectivity metrics? Neuroimage . 2016 ; 138 : 284 – 293 . doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.05.070 27262239 PMC5056955 111 Lachaux JP , Rodriguez E , Martinerie J , Varela FJ . Measuring phase synchrony in brain signals . Hum Brain Mapp . 1999 ; 8 ( 4 ): 194 – 208 . doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097‐0193(1999)8:4%3C194::AID‐HBM4%3E3.0.CO;2‐C 10619414 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0193(1999)8:4&lt;194::AID-HBM4&gt;3.0.CO;2-C PMC6873296 112 Koenig T , Lehmann D , Saito N , Kuginuki T , Kinoshita T , Koukkou M . Decreased functional connectivity of EEG theta‐frequency activity in first‐episode, neuroleptic‐naïve patients with schizophrenia: preliminary results . Schizophr Res . 2001 ; 50 ( 1 ): 55 – 60 . doi: 10.1016/S0920-9964(00)00154-7 11378314 113 Nolte G , Bai O , Wheaton L , Mari Z , Vorbach S , Hallett M . Identifying true brain interaction from EEG data using the imaginary part of coherency . Clin Neurophysiol . 2004 ; 115 ( 10 ): 2292 – 2307 . 15351371 10.1016/j.clinph.2004.04.029 114 Lehmann D , Strik WK , Henggeler B , Koenig T , Koukkou M . Brain electric microstates and momentary conscious mind states as building blocks of spontaneous thinking: I. Visual imagery and abstract thoughts . Int J Psychophysiol . 1998 ; 29 ( 1 ): 1 – 11 . doi: 10.1016/S0167-8760(97)00098-6 9641243 115 Badhwar A , Tam A , Dansereau C , Orban P , Hoffstaedter F , Bellec P . Resting‐state network dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review and meta‐analysis . Alzheimers Dement (Amst) . 2017 ; 8 : 73 – 85 . doi: 10.1016/j.dadm.2017.03.007 28560308 PMC5436069 116 van Nifterick AM , Gouw AA , van Kesteren RE , Scheltens P , Stam CJ , de Haan W . A multiscale brain network model links Alzheimer's disease‐mediated neuronal hyperactivity to large‐scale oscillatory slowing . Alz Res Ther . 2022 ; 14 ( 1 ): 101 . doi: 10.1186/s13195-022-01041-4 PMC9310500 35879779 117 Rasband MN . Glial contributions to neural function and disease . Mol Cell Proteomics . 2016 ; 15 ( 2 ): 355 – 361 . doi: 10.1074/mcp.R115.053744 26342039 PMC4739659 118 Mosconi L . Brain glucose metabolism in the early and specific diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease . Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging . 2005 ; 32 ( 4 ): 486 – 510 . doi: 10.1007/s00259-005-1762-7 15747152 119 Rocher AB , Chapon F , Blaizot X , Baron JC , Chavoix C . Resting‐state brain glucose utilization as measured by PET is directly related to regional synaptophysin levels: a study in baboons . Neuroimage . 2003 ; 20 ( 3 ): 1894 – 1898 . doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.07.002 14642499 120 Zimmer ER , Parent MJ , Souza DG , et al. [ 18 F]FDG PET signal is driven by astroglial glutamate transport . Nat Neurosci . 2017 ; 20 ( 3 ): 393 – 395 . doi: 10.1038/nn.4492 28135241 PMC5378483 121 de Haan W , Mott KK , Katherine Mott , et al. Activity dependent degeneration explains hub vulnerability in Alzheimer's disease . PLoS Comput Biol . 2012 ; 8 ( 8 ): e1002582 . doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002582 22915996 PMC3420961 122 Alexandersen CG , de Haan W , Bick C , Goriely A . A multi‐scale model explains oscillatory slowing and neuronal hyperactivity in Alzheimer's disease . J R Soc Interface . 2023 ; 20 ( 198 ): 20220607 . doi: 10.1098/rsif.2022.0607 36596460 PMC9810432 123 Sanchez‐Rodriguez LM , Bezgin G , Carbonell F , et al. Personalized whole‐brain neural mass models reveal combined Aβ and tau hyperexcitable influences in Alzheimer's disease . Commun Biol . 2024 ; 7 ( 1 ): 1 – 13 . doi: 10.1038/s42003-024-06217-2 38704445 PMC11069569 124 Khalil M , Teunissen CE , Lehmann S , et al. Neurofilaments as biomarkers in neurological disorders—towards clinical application . Nat Rev Neurol . 2024 ; 20 ( 5 ): 269 – 287 . doi: 10.1038/s41582-024-00955-x 38609644 125 Benedet AL , Milà‐Alomà M , Vrillon A , et al. Differences between plasma and cerebrospinal fluid glial fibrillary acidic protein levels across the Alzheimer disease continuum . JAMA Neurol . 2021 ; 78 ( 12 ): 1471 – 1483 . doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.3671 34661615 PMC8524356 126 Engemann DA , Kozynets O , Sabbagh D , et al. Combining magnetoencephalography with magnetic resonance imaging enhances learning of surrogate‐biomarkers . eLife . 2020 ; 9 : e54055 . doi: 10.7554/eLife.54055 32423528 PMC7308092 127 Engemann DA , Mellot A , Höchenberger R , et al. A reusable benchmark of brain‐age prediction from M/EEG resting‐state signals . Neuroimage . 2022 ; 262 : 119521 . doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119521 35905809 128 Babiloni C , Arakaki X , Baez S , et al. Alpha rhythm and Alzheimer's disease: has Hans Berger's dream come true? Clin Neurophysiol . 2025 ; 172 : 33 – 50 . doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2025.02.256 39978053 129 Villeneuve S , Poirier J , Breitner JCS , et al. The PREVENT‐AD cohort: accelerating Alzheimer's disease research and treatment in Canada and beyond . Alzheimer's Dement . 2025 ; 21 ( 10 ): e70653 . doi: 10.1002/alz.70653 41020412 PMC12477627 130 Seeck M , Koessler L , Bast T , et al. The standardized EEG electrode array of the IFCN . Clin Neurophysiol . 2017 ; 128 ( 10 ): 2070 – 2077 . Published online 2017. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1388245717304832 28778476 10.1016/j.clinph.2017.06.254 131 Hari R , Baillet S , Barnes G , et al. IFCN‐endorsed practical guidelines for clinical magnetoencephalography (MEG) . Clin Neurophysiol . 2018 ; 129 ( 8 ): 1720 – 1747 . doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2018.03.042 29724661 PMC6045462 132 Samuelsson JG , Peled N , Mamashli F , Ahveninen J , Hämäläinen MS . Spatial fidelity of MEG/EEG source estimates: a general evaluation approach . Neuroimage . 2021 ; 224 : 117430 . doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117430 33038537 PMC7793168 133 Little S , Bonaiuto J , Meyer SS , Lopez J , Bestmann S , Barnes G . Quantifying the performance of MEG source reconstruction using resting state data . Neuroimage . 2018 ; 181 : 453 – 460 . doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.07.030 30012537 PMC6150947 134 Babiloni C , Arakaki X , Azami H , et al. Measures of resting state EEG rhythms for clinical trials in Alzheimer's disease: recommendations of an expert panel . Alzheimers Dement . 2021 ; 17 ( 9 ): 1528 – 1553 . doi: 10.1002/alz.12311 33860614 PMC8647863 135 Wiesman AI , da Silva Castanheira J , Baillet S . Stability of spectral estimates in resting‐state magnetoencephalography: recommendations for minimal data duration with neuroanatomical specificity . Neuroimage . 2022 ; 247 : 118823 . doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118823 34923132 PMC8852336 136 da Silva Castanheira J , Orozco Perez HD , Misic B , Baillet S . Brief segments of neurophysiological activity enable individual differentiation . Nat Commun . 2021 ; 12 ( 1 ): 5713 . doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-25895-8 34588439 PMC8481307 137 Huk A , Bonnen K , He BJ . Beyond trial‐based paradigms: continuous behavior, ongoing neural activity, and natural stimuli . J Neurosci . 2018 ; 38 ( 35 ): 7551 – 7558 . doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1920-17.2018 30037835 PMC6113904 138 Jas M , Engemann DA , Bekhti Y , Raimondo F , Gramfort A . Autoreject: automated artifact rejection for MEG and EEG data . Neuroimage . 2017 ; 159 : 417 – 429 . doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.06.030 28645840 PMC7243972 139 Hari R , Baillet S , Barnes G , et al. IFCN‐endorsed practical guidelines for clinical magnetoencephalography (MEG) . Clin Neurophysiol . 2018 ; 129 ( 8 ): 1720 – 1747 . doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2018.03.042 29724661 PMC6045462 140 de Haan W , Stam CJ , Jones BF , Zuiderwijk IM , van Dijk BW , Scheltens P . Resting‐state oscillatory brain dynamics in Alzheimer disease . J Clin Neurophysiol . 2008 ; 25 ( 4 ): 187 . doi: 10.1097/WNP.0b013e31817da184 18677182 141 Güntekin B , Erdal F , Bölükbaş B , Hanoğlu L , Yener G , Duygun R . Alterations of resting‐state Gamma frequency characteristics in aging and Alzheimer's disease . Cogn Neurodyn . 2023 ; 17 ( 4 ): 829 – 844 . doi: 10.1007/s11571-022-09873-4 37522051 PMC10374515 142 Mably AJ , Colgin LL . Gamma oscillations in cognitive disorders . Curr Opin Neurobiol . 2018 ; 52 : 182 – 187 . doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2018.07.009 30121451 PMC6139067 143 Lisgaras CP , Scharfman HE . High‐frequency oscillations (250‐500 Hz) in animal models of Alzheimer's disease and two animal models of epilepsy . Epilepsia . 2023 ; 64 ( 1 ): 231 – 246 . doi: 10.1111/epi.17462 36346209 PMC10501735 144 Shandilya MCV , Addo‐Osafo K , Ranasinghe KG , et al. High‐frequency oscillations in epileptic and non‐epileptic Alzheimer's disease patients and the differential effect of levetiracetam on the oscillations . Brain Commun . 2025 ; 7 ( 1 ): fcaf041 . doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaf041 39949405 PMC11822293 145 Lisgaras CP , Giménez S , Carmona‐Iragui M , et al. High‐frequency oscillations &gt; 250 Hz in people with Down syndrome and associated Alzheimer's disease dementia . Alzheimers Dement . 2025 ; 21 ( 7 ): e70386 . doi: 10.1002/alz.70386 40642994 PMC12246959 146 Triebkorn P , Stefanovski L , Dhindsa K , et al. Brain simulation augments machine‐learning–based classification of dementia . Alzheimers Dement (N Y) . 2022 ; 8 ( 1 ): e12303 . doi: 10.1002/trc2.12303 35601598 PMC9107774