pmc Alzheimers Dement Alzheimers Dement 4549 alzdem ALZ Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia 1552-5260 1552-5279 Wiley PMC11982707 PMC11982707.1 11982707 11982707 40207399 10.1002/alz.14604 ALZ14604 1 Review Article Review Article Risk of Alzheimer's disease in Down syndrome: Insights gained by multi‐omics QU et al. Qu Hui‐Qi https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9317-4488 1 Liu Yichuan 1 Connolly John J. 1 Mentch Frank D. 1 Kao Charlly 1 Hakonarson Hakon https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2814-7461 1 2 3 4 5 hakonarson@chop.edu 1 The Center for Applied Genomics Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Philadelphia Pennsylvania USA 2 Department of Pediatrics, The Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia Pennsylvania USA 3 Division of Human Genetics Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Philadelphia Pennsylvania USA 4 Division of Pulmonary Medicine Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Philadelphia Pennsylvania USA 5 Faculty of Medicine University of Iceland Reykjavik Iceland * Correspondence Hakon Hakonarson, Center for Applied Genomics, 3615 Civic Center Blvd, Abramson Building, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Email: hakonarson@chop.edu 10 4 2025 4 2025 21 4 485818 10.1002/alz.v21.4 e14604 14 1 2025 16 7 2024 16 1 2025 10 04 2025 10 04 2025 11 04 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's Association. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. Abstract Individuals with Down syndrome (DS) are highly susceptible to Alzheimer's disease (AD). The integration of genomics, transcriptomics, epigenomics, proteomics, and metabolomics enables unprecedented understanding of DS‐AD, offering a detailed picture of this complex issue. The vast ‐omics data also present challenges that reflect the complexity of genetic information flow. These studies nonetheless reveal critical mechanisms behind AD risk, including unique observations in DS that differ from those seen in the general population and familial dominant AD. In addition, the correlations between the AD polygenic risk score and proteins related to female infertility and autoimmune thyroiditis corroborate clinical observations. Metabolomic data reveal disrupted metabolic networks, offering prospects for a dynamic score to create specialized nutritional interventions. By adopting a multidimensional perspective with integrated reductionism, the evolving landscape presents an opportunity to identify promising directions for developing precision strategies to mitigate the impact of AD in the DS population. Highlights Individuals with Down syndrome (DS) are highly susceptible to Alzheimer's disease (AD). DS‐AD is characterized by its polygenic nature, extending beyond chromosome 21 with significant contributions from various chromosomes. DS‐AD also presents unique features that differ from those observed in the general population and familial dominant AD. Our review consolidates key findings from genomics, transcriptomics, epigenomics, proteomics, and metabolomics, providing a comprehensive view of the molecular mechanisms underlying DS‐AD. We highlight promising research directions to further elucidate the pathogenesis of DS‐AD. Alzheimer's disease Down syndrome epigenomics genomics metabolomics ‐omics polygenic risk score proteomics transcriptomics Gabriella Miller Kids First Pediatric Research Program consortium Common Fund of the Office of the Director of the National Institutes of Health International Hundred Thousand Plus Cohort Consortium Children's Hospital of Philadelphia 10.13039/100006458 Neff Family Foundation pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY-NC-ND source-schema-version-number 2.0 cover-date April 2025 details-of-publishers-convertor Converter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.5.4 mode:remove_FC converted:10.04.2025 Qu H‐Q , Liu Y , Connolly JJ , Mentch FD , Kao C , Hakonarson H . Risk of Alzheimer's disease in Down syndrome: Insights gained by multi‐omics . Alzheimer's Dement . 2025 ; 21 : e14604 . 10.1002/alz.14604 40207399 1 DOWN SYNDROME AND ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE Down syndrome (DS) or trisomy 21 (T21), first described by Dr. John Langdon Down in 1866, 1 is a genetic anomaly characterized by the presence of an additional copy of chromosome 21 (Chr21), 2 occurring at a rate of 13.65 per 10,000 live births in the United States. 3 Complete T21 accounts for ≈ 95% of DS cases, frequently resulting from maternal meiotic non‐disjunction of the Chr21 pair, with an increased risk associated with the mother's age. 4 In 4% of cases, a fragment of Chr21 is attached (Robertsonian translocation) to another chromosome, such as Robertsonian t(14;21) or t(21;21), with approximately one third being inherited, more commonly from the mother. 4 An infrequent form is mosaic DS, in which varying proportions of cells in the body have an extra copy of Chr21, often resulting in milder symptoms. 5 This additional genetic material affects the development of the body and brain, leading to characteristic physical features, including almond‐shaped eyes, a small nose, epicanthic folds, macroglossia, short neck, and hypotonia, alongside mild to moderate intellectual disabilities. 6 To date, individuals with DS have a lifespan reaching into their 60s. 7 Individuals with DS are at a notably higher risk than the general population of developing Alzheimer's disease (AD). After reaching the age of 30 years, nearly all adults with DS develop the characteristic neuropathological changes of AD, that is, amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques and tau tangles. 8 Approximately 50% to 70% of DS patients may experience dementia by the time they reach 60 to 70 years of age 9 , which is 5 to 6 times higher than individuals aged ≥ 65 in the general population. DS‐AD is receiving extensive research attention. 10 AD is characterized by irreversible neuronal degeneration, driven by multiple interrelated mechanisms. 11 The extracellular plaques formed by Aβ (particularly Aβ42 and Aβ40) and the neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) composed of abnormal clumps of hyperphosphorylated tau proteins (p‐tau181 and p‐tau217) in the brains of individuals with AD serve as central mechanisms in the pathogenesis of AD. 12 , 13 As a result of T21, DS‐AD involves the overexpression of the amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) gene, which is located on Chr21q21.3. Analyses of human AD brains show that tau pathology begins approximately a decade before the formation of Aβ plaques, 14 , 15 and tau protein dysfunction is more closely correlated with dementia than amyloid. 16 Targeting tau protein may be more effective in improving cognitive function. 14 , 17 Tau positron emission tomography (PET) scans in 312 individuals across the AD spectrum demonstrated that tau spreads through neuronal communication pathways during normal aging, with this process being accelerated by the presence of brain Aβ. 18 In DS, tau deposition plays a significant role in early cognitive decline, with findings indicating that tau PET is a more sensitive biomarker than Aβ PET for predicting early memory problems in adults with DS. 19 The cross‐sectional study by Flores‐Aguilar et al. extensively characterizes the evolving neuroinflammatory profile across the lifespan of individuals with DS, revealing early alterations in microglial morphology and inflammatory cytokine expression. 20 Although neuroinflammation is not formally part of the amyloid, tau, neurodegeneration (ATN) framework 21 of DS‐AD prediction, Aβ accumulation, tau hyperphosphorylation, and chronic neuroinflammation form a vicious cycle in which each process reinforces the others, driving the progression of neurodegeneration. Proteins such as glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; a marker of astrocyte activation 22 ) and neurofilament light chain (NfL; a marker of axonal damage 23 ) are increasingly recognized as indicators of neuroinflammation and neuronal injury in AD. 24 In addition, mitochondrial dysfunction, 25 oxidative stress, synaptic dysfunction, and excitotoxicity may be involved in AD pathogenesis, with these mechanisms being interrelated and capable of amplifying each other. 26 , 27 , 28 Basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCNs) play a crucial role in cognitive function by providing cholinergic innervation to critical brain regions such as the cortex and hippocampus. In addition to impaired neuronal development in DS, the degeneration of BFCNs in DS‐AD occurs through the mechanisms described above, making them a therapeutic target for both DS and AD. Cholinergic enhancement through acetylcholinesterase inhibitors has the potential to slow cognitive decline in DS‐AD. 29 With no cure or proven preventive measures for AD to date, understanding the specific pathological mechanisms underlying the development of DS‐AD is crucial for the development of strategies to reduce the risk of developing the disease or slow its progression. The recent review by Martini et al. 30 offers an insightful analysis of the link between DS and AD, particularly focusing on the genetic predispositions linked to T21. Their work highlights how genes on Chr21 contribute to metabolic imbalances, immune dysregulation, cerebrovascular issues, and oxidative stress in DS. 30 In a broader context, the genetic contributors to AD in this population extend beyond Chr21, incorporating a broad array of genes that play pivotal roles in the disease's complex pathology. Notably, the apolipoprotein E ( APOE ) gene on chromosome 19, especially its ε4 variant, is recognized for its substantial risk factor in sporadic AD, 31 , 32 potentially aggravating DS‐AD by influencing lipid metabolism and the clearance of Aβ. Rare variants in the presenilin 1 ( PSEN1 ) gene at Chr14 and the presenilin 2 ( PSEN2 ) gene at Chr1 are associated with familial dominant forms of AD, 33 , 34 , 35 whereas their expression is downregulated in developmental and adult DS brains. 36 , 37 The complex genomic landscape of DS‐AD may involve synergistic effects between the overexpressed genes on T21 and genes on other chromosomes, which adds to the complexity of the AD phenotype in DS. This intricate genomic interplay underscores the need for a more holistic approach. Multi‐omics research emerges as a pivotal breakthrough, weaving together genomics, transcriptomics, epigenomics, proteomics, and metabolomics to illuminate the molecular complexities of DS‐AD. This integrated approach transcends traditional research methods, offering personalized insights that promise to revolutionize disease management and treatment. By identifying specific biomarkers and therapeutic targets, multi‐omics paves the way for early detection, preventive strategies, and targeted therapies tailored to the unique molecular profile of DS‐AD. This advancement not only deepens our understanding but also heralds a hopeful future, in which the challenges of DS and AD are effectively managed, significantly improving the quality of life and health outcomes for affected individuals. 2 GENOMICS INSIGHTS 2.1 Genetics on Chr21 In the general population, APP and ADAMTS1 on Chr21 have been associated with an increased genetic risk of AD (see the supporting information ). The additional copy of APP at Chr21 in individuals with DS leads to an augmented production of Aβ peptides, consequently culminating in the formation of Aβ plaques. Compelling evidence for the role of APP gene dosage in AD risk come from individuals with partial T21 and APP ‐related familial dominant AD. APP is not located in the DS critical region (DSCR). DS patients with partial T21 lacking the APP gene triplication do not progress to AD dementia, even into their sixth decade of life, suggesting a direct link between APP dosage and AD risk in DS. 38 Furthermore, mosaicism, in which T21 is present in only a subset of an individual's cells, introduces an additional layer of complexity. 39 Inherited mutations affecting chromosome segregation can elevate the risk for both DS and AD, highlighting the importance of mitotic errors in AD development. 40 Mosaicism may contribute to both familial and sporadic AD. 40 Even low‐degree T21 mosaicism promotes early‐onset AD (EOAD). 41 These T21 cells increase AD risk by elevating the dosage of the APP gene and promoting Aβ production, similar to the mechanism seen in DS. However, AD tends to develop later in individuals with mosaicism compared to those with full T21, as the majority of normal diploid cells modulate this effect. 40 Individuals with DS begin to accumulate Aβ at a very young age, starting in childhood, which is significantly earlier than in the general population. This accumulation continues to increase throughout their lifespan. 42 Interestingly, the sensitivity to gene dosage manifests as significant overexpression of APP in the adult DS brain rather than during the fetal stage. 43 This finding challenges the notion of a straightforward gene dosage effect throughout life, yet it does not explain the early‐life accumulation of Aβ. Other factors beyond APP gene dosage alone may contribute to the early onset of Aβ accumulation in individuals with DS, which remains to be addressed by further study. In addition to T21, mutations within the APP gene can cause familial dominant AD by disrupting normal APP processing. Specifically, mutations near the β‐ and γ‐secretase cleavage sites shift APP processing toward the amyloidogenic pathway, increasing the production of Aβ42, a highly aggregation‐prone peptide. 44 , 45 The recognition of APP as a significant genetic contributor to DS‐AD opens avenues for therapeutic interventions. Targeted drug development focusing on modulating APP expression or its processing pathways could offer promising strategies to mitigate Aβ plaque formation. 46 The study by Hung et al. demonstrates the effectiveness of antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) targeting APP and reducing its protein levels, rescuing endolysosome and autophagy dysfunction, and significantly decreasing intracellular and extracellular Aβ aggregates in human‐induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)–derived cortical neurons with APP duplication. 47 ASOs being developed for APP offer promising potential for DS‐AD. 48 Additionally, gene editing techniques, such as clustered regularly interspaced palindromic repeats (CRISPR) CRISPR‐associated protein 9 (Cas9), present a futuristic but potentially viable approach to correct or modify the dosage sensitivity of APP directly in the genome, 49 offering a tailored approach to prevent AD in individuals with DS. Beyond APP , other critical genes located on Chr21, such as dual specificity tyrosine phosphorylation regulated kinase 1A ( DYRK1A ) and DNA methyltransferase 3 like ( DNMT3L ), play crucial roles in DS brain development. DYRK1A at Chr21q22.13 50 has been identified as a key gene within DSCR, and its dosage is critical in the central nervous system during development and aging 51 and correlated with developmental cognitive deficits in DS. 52 The kinase encoded by DYRK1A directly phosphorylates the tau protein at multiple sites, 53 contributing to its hyperphosphorylation. The amyloid burden caused by APP overexpression due to T21 and tau hyperphosphorylation driven by DYRK1A are synergistically linked. Subtle differences in the spatial distribution, timing, and magnitude of tau burden have been observed between individuals with DS and those with APP ‐related autosomal‐dominant AD, 54 potentially linked to the DSCR genes. DYRK1A also affects gene expression through histone modification and is implicated in various cellular processes. 55 , 56 DNMT3L at Chr21q22.3 encodes a nuclear protein with similarity to DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs). 57 While DNMT3L does not possess DNA methyltransferase activity, it stimulates the DNA methylation functions of DNMT3A and DNMT3B through direct interaction in a dose‐dependent manner. 58 Overexpression of DNMT3L during neurodevelopment replicates a facet of the genome‐wide DNA methylation pattern characteristic of DS. 59 Understanding the dose‐dependent roles of DYRK1A and DNMT3L in the epigenetic landscape of the DS brain offers valuable insights for potential therapeutic approaches, such as silencing these genes through CRISPR‐Cas9. 60 2.2 Genetic insights from other chromosomes in the general population APOE is a major susceptibility locus for AD in the general population 61 ( supporting information ). In DS individuals, the presence of the APOE ε4 allele compounds the AD risk, leading to an even earlier onset of AD symptoms. 31 , 32 A cross‐sectional study of 80 young children and 240 adults with DS showed varied association between APOE ε4 and attention across the lifespan. While ε4 carriers displayed an attentional advantage in young children, possession of an ε4 allele was linked to a disadvantage among older adults. 62 A cohort study of 464 DS adults revealed that carriers of the APOE ɛ4 allele exhibited earlier clinical symptoms and biomarker changes (e.g., Aβ, tau, and neurodegeneration) associated with AD. 63 Additionally, carriers also showed reduced metabolism in subcortical and parieto‐occipital regions, along with diminished medial temporal volume. 63 Among the AD genome‐wide association study (GWAS) loci in the general population 64 , 65 (Table S1 in supporting information), the phosphatidylinositol binding clathrin assembly protein gene ( PICALM ) at Chr11q14.2 has been shown to specifically affect the age at onset of DS‐AD. 66 PICALM is known for its role in clathrin‐mediated endocytosis, 67 a process critical for synaptic functioning and the regulation of Aβ levels. In the context of DS‐AD, its impact may involve distinct mechanisms driven by the unique molecular features of DS, such as APP triplication. These distinct features likely modify PICALM ’s role in regulating APP internalization, trafficking, and Aβ clearance, linking cellular trafficking to amyloid pathology. 68 Presenilins encoded by PSEN1 and PSEN2 serve as the catalytic core of the γ‐secretase complex, which plays a crucial role in APP processing and Aβ generation. Rare variants in PSEN1 and PSEN2 are associated with familial dominant forms of AD 33 , 34 , 35 ( supporting information ). γ‐secretase inhibitors and modulators have been developed as potential treatments for AD in the general population. However, their effectiveness in DS‐AD may differ due to the altered expression levels of PSEN1 and PSEN2 and the overproduction of APP . These treatments could be beneficial in DS patients with PSEN1 and PSEN2 rare mutations. However, their broader utility depends on the specific levels and activity of γ‐secretase in the DS brain. Transcriptome data from developmental and adult DS brains indicate lower expression levels of PSEN1 and PSEN2 , 36 , 37 highlighting the unique molecular context of DS‐AD. 2.3 Polygenic nature of AD and complex contributions from DS: integrating blood proteomics Investigations into the AD polygenic risk score (PRS) based on the AD GWAS loci have provided additional valuable information on the genetic susceptibility of individuals with DS to AD 69 , 70 ( supporting information ). In particular, the AD PRS affects memory in DS people, regardless of their APOE status, suggesting a commonality in the genes and pathways that contribute to AD and those affecting dementia and memory deterioration in the DS population. 70 Our study indicates that the AD PRS is correlated with blood levels of proteins related to female infertility (in line with the observed inverse correlation between the parity of children and AD risk in women 71 ), autoimmune thyroiditis, and fetal growth retardation. 72 This association is noteworthy given the unique reproductive patterns observed in women with DS, who generally have fewer children. 73 This reduction in parity, previously linked to an increased AD risk in the general female population, may similarly elevate AD risk in the DS population, adding a sociobiological layer to the genetic risk factors for AD. The correlation between AD PRS and proteins linked to female infertility underscores a complex interplay between reproductive health and neurodegenerative processes, particularly through the neuroprotective roles of estrogen. 74 The involvement of CCAAT enhancer binding protein beta ( CEBPB ) on Chr 20q13, follicle‐stimulating hormone subunit beta ( FSHB ) on Chr11p14, leptin ( LEP ) on Chr7q32, luteinizing hormone beta polypeptide ( LHB ) on Chr19q13, and LIF, interleukin 6 family cytokine ( LIF ) on Chr22q12, offers a molecular bridge between these domains. 72 CEBPB is a transcription factor, pivotal in regulating inflammatory and immune responses. 75 Its interaction with estrogen signaling can modulate neuroinflammatory responses, involved in AD's pathogenesis. 76 FSHB and LHB are integral to gonadal function regulation, impacting estrogen production. 77 Dysregulation of these hormones can lead to altered estrogen levels, affecting its ability to modulate Aβ clearance and provide neuroprotection. It is worth noting, however, that the relationship between nulliparity and estrogen levels is complex. While estrogen is known to exert neuroprotective effects, estrogen levels across the lifespan are indeed higher in women who do not bear children, as established in the context of breast cancer research. 78 The intricacies of estrogen's role in neuroprotection warrant further investigation, particularly in the context of nulliparity and AD risk. While estrogen's neuroprotective effects are well documented, its interplay with reproductive factors such as nulliparity may introduce additional complexities that necessitate a more nuanced understanding of its mechanisms in neurodegenerative diseases. LEP , involved in energy homeostasis and appetite regulation, also plays a role in neuroprotective processes. 79 Leptin can influence neuroinflammatory pathways and modulate hippocampal synaptic function, crucial for learning and memory. 80 Autoimmune thyroiditis, particularly Hashimoto's thyroiditis, is more prevalent in individuals with DS compared to the general population, 81 suggesting a complex link between immune system dysregulation and the increased AD risk in DS. This link is further supported by the correlation between AD PRS and proteins encoded by genes located on specific chromosomes: CD3 gamma chain ( CD3G ) on chr11q23, glycoprotein hormones, alpha polypeptide ( CGA ) on Chr6q14, C‐X‐C motif chemokine ligand 9 (CXCL9) on Chr4q21, Fas cell surface death receptor ( FAS ) on Chr10q23, and leukocyte immunoglobulin‐like receptor B1 ( LILRB1 ) on Chr19q13. 72 CD3G is integral to T‐cell receptor (TCR) signaling and T‐cell activation. 82 Alterations in CD3G expression could impact immune surveillance mechanisms in the brain, potentially influencing the inflammatory milieu associated with AD pathology in DS. CGA forms a part of the thyroid‐stimulating hormone (TSH). 83 CXCL9 is involved in immune cell recruitment to inflammation sites. FAS mediates apoptosis. LILRB1 modulates immune responses, including T‐cell–mediated reactions. Low birth weight is common in neonates with DS. 84 This association adds a layer of complexity to our understanding of genetic factors influencing not only cognitive health but also prenatal development in individuals with DS. The intricate relationships between AD risk and fetal growth are mediated by the correlation with proteins encoded by insulin‐like growth factor 1 ( IGF1 ) on Chr12q23, insulin‐like growth factor binding protein 3 ( IGFBP3 ) on Chr7p12, LEP , selectin P ( SELP ) on Chr1q24, and transmembrane protein 70 ( TMEM70 ) on Chr8q21. 72 IGF1 plays a critical role in both prenatal growth and postnatal brain development. IGFBP3 regulates the availability of IGF1 by binding to it. TMEM70 is involved in mitochondrial function and energy metabolism. 85 2.4 Perspective and limitations of genetics Unraveling the intricate relationships among AD risk, thyroid function, reproductive history, and fetal growth provides a comprehensive perspective on the multifaceted nature of health considerations in this population. These findings also highlight the complex interplay between susceptibility to AD and various health factors in DS. Looking ahead, the integration of more sophisticated PRS models, particularly those delineating specific biological processes like neuroinflammation and microglial activation, endocytosis, and fibril regulation in AD 86 , 87 hold immense potential. While a global PRS may underestimate the disease heterogeneity, these specific models provide a data‐driven assessment of individualized risk components, elucidating genetic variants specifically linked to each person's unique pathogenic mechanisms. These pathway‐specific PRSs demand extensive analysis across diverse traits or diseases that share common pathways. Fortunately, the availability of large, well‐characterized GWAS datasets to the public makes such targeted PRSs increasingly feasible. Meanwhile, managing multiple PRSs for the same disease demands a sophisticated clinical approach and decision‐making process. This personalized strategy will not only deepen our understanding of the genetic and disease interactions in DS‐AD but also pave the way for customized interventions and precision medicine in neurodegenerative disorders. Despite these promising developments, it is important to acknowledge limitations inherent to PRS approaches, especially in the context of sampling. The utility of PRS models depends significantly on the population being studied, whether it is individuals with DS, those with familial AD, or the general population of a specific ethnicity. Sampling biases can influence PRS predictive power, underscoring the need for caution when interpreting results. 88 Furthermore, etiologic heterogeneity, such as differences between the younger and older patients, is inevitable in AD. 89 This underscores the critical importance of evaluating PRSs with careful consideration of confounding factors, such as aging, environmental influences, comorbid conditions, and genetic background. 90 Insights gained from genetic studies in the general population underscore effects from various chromosomes and have significantly advanced our understanding of AD, providing clues about how genetic risk factors influence pathways relevant to DS‐AD (Figure 1 ). For example, analysis of AD GWAS loci highlights biological processes such as protein processing and immune response regulation. Altered protein processing and immune responses in DS may exacerbate neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration, accelerating the onset and progression of DS‐AD. 91 However, it is crucial to differentiate those findings generated from the general population ( supporting information ) from those specific to DS due to distinct physiological differences. While the PRS has shown great promise in precision medicine for AD in the general population, its application to DS is more complex. In DS, the overexpression of APP from an early age leads to profound amyloid pathology, potentially altering how PRS interacts with other AD‐associated loci. Factors such as T21‐related gene dosage and distinct immune and neuroinflammatory responses may affect the predictability of AD risk through PRS in DS, requiring refinement of these tools to address DS‐specific biological contexts. Further studying the interplay between AD‐predisposing variants and T21 could lead to exciting and potentially groundbreaking discoveries. However, it is crucial to approach this research with respect and empathy for the individuals and communities affected. Discoveries in the genomic interplay of AD‐predisposing variants and T21 should be aimed at developing better treatments, care strategies, and support systems for individuals with DS who are at risk of developing AD. The ultimate goal should be to enhance their well‐being and quality of life, rather than simply advancing scientific knowledge for its own sake. FIGURE 1 Genomic insights into the polygenic nature of DS‐AD involving effects from various chromosomes. Interesting genetics and clinical connections are highlighted. Multiple AD loci from both Chr21 and other chromosomes have been identified. The PRS for AD is associated with proteins related to conditions like female infertility, autoimmune thyroiditis, and fetal growth retardation. As one significant factor among many, T21 in DS leads to the overexpression of APP . The DS critical region (DSCR) contains DYRK1A , a key gene implicated in tau hyperphosphorylation. Brain defects in DS (e.g., synaptic, neurovascular) increase the risk of AD. In addition to these genetic mechanisms, DS may contribute to AD through mechanisms related to female infertility, autoimmune thyroiditis, and fetal growth retardation. AD, Alzheimer's disease; Chr21, chromosome 21; DS, Down syndrome; PRS, polygenic risk score; T21, trisomy 21. 3 TRANSCRIPTOMICS FINDINGS IN DS BRAINS Transcriptomics, which involves the study of the complete set of RNA transcripts, provides a dynamic and real‐time snapshot of gene expression patterns. This gene expression profiling perspective is pivotal in deciphering the downstream effects of genetic variations, offering a comprehensive understanding of how genes are actively translated into functional proteins, including influencing the intricate biological processes associated with DS‐AD pathogenesis. 3.1 Key gene expression changes in developmental DS brain Olmos‐Serrano et al. conducted a multi‐region transcriptome analysis of brains from individuals with DS and euploid controls, encompassing brain tissues from mid‐fetal development to adulthood (GEO GSE59630 ). 36 The study uncovered genome‐wide alterations in gene expression, impacting a substantial number of genes across multiple brain regions with temporal and spatial specificity. 36 One of the most critical findings from this analysis was the identification of key synaptic genes involved in neuronal communication and development, which were significantly downregulated in developmental DS brains. Synaptic dysfunction, characterized by impaired communication between neurons, is a central feature of both DS and AD. Specifically, the synaptic genes neuronal pentraxin 2 ( NPTX2 ), rabphilin 3A ( RPH3A ), and brain‐derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ), which are positively associated with global cognitive function across multiple excitatory neuron subtypes in a large‐sample single‐cell RNA sequencing (scRNA‐seq) study of the human prefrontal cortex by Mathys et al., 92 have been observed in downregulation in DS. These downregulated genes may contribute to the development of dysfunctional neuronal circuits, a hallmark that both DS and AD share. RPH3A encodes an effector of the small GTPase Rab3A, facilitating the docking and fusion of synaptic vesicles with the presynaptic membrane. 93 BDNF encodes a member of the neurotrophin family, promoting the survival, differentiation, and growth of neurons. 94 NPTX2 encodes a member of the neuronal pentraxins family, interacting with AMPA receptors to modulate synaptic formation and strength. 95 However, it is important to recognize that while neurons are directly impacted, it is becoming increasingly clear that non‐neuronal factors also play a significant role in DS‐AD progression. Vascular dysfunction, including the degeneration of blood–brain barrier (BBB) integrity and reduced cerebral blood flow, has been implicated in both DS and AD. 96 Platelet and endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 ( PECAM1 ), expressed on the surface of endothelial cells, is crucial for maintaining vascular integrity. 97 Upregulation of PECAM1 is observed in developmental DS brains, which could be a compensatory response to maintain vascular health or might contribute to pathogenesis if it leads to dysregulated angiogenesis or inflammation. 3.2 Key gene expression changes in the adult DS brain Compared to the developmental DS brain, the adult DS brain exhibits additional dysregulation in pathways specific to neurodegenerative processes, including cytoskeletal regulation, vesicle trafficking, and heightened immune and oxidative stress responses, which are closely associated with the progression of AD pathology. 37 These changes, as represented by the overrepresentation of gene sets related to antigen presentation, integrin‐mediated signaling, actin cytoskeleton organization, and vesicle‐mediated transport, mark a transition from developmental dysfunction to neurodegenerative processes. Immune activation and oxidative stress responses contribute significantly to the inflammatory milieu characteristic of AD, while dysregulation of cytoskeletal dynamics and vesicle transport mechanisms further disrupt synaptic integrity and neuronal signaling, exacerbating cognitive deficits. Additionally, persistent activation of growth and developmental pathways in the adult DS brain may drive maladaptive cellular responses, compounding neurodegeneration. 37 3.3 The role of non‐neuronal cells in DS‐AD pathogenesis The use of cutting‐edge technology such as scRNA‐seq has played a pivotal role in revolutionizing our comprehension of cellular heterogeneity and the dynamics of gene expression at an unprecedented resolution. 98 Notably, single‐nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA‐seq) has emerged as a powerful technique for studying complex tissues, particularly those challenging to dissociate into single cells, such as brain tissue. 99 The brain's complexity, with its myriad closely linked cell types, poses challenges for scRNA‐seq due to the difficulty of cell dissociation, which can lead to cell damage and altered gene expressions. snRNA‐seq offers a solution by avoiding cell dissociation, allowing for the detailed analysis of the brain's cellular diversity. This technique facilitates the identification of distinct neuronal and non‐neuronal cells, enabling research into cell‐specific gene expression and the discovery of molecular markers for various brain regions and cell types. 100 Specifically, the DS study highlighted abnormalities in the expression of genes linked to the development of oligodendrocytes (ODC) and the myelination process. Among these genes, several have also been identified to be of trajectory differential expression (t‐DEX) in ODC, microglia (MG), and astrocytes (ASC) in AD brains by Morabito et al.’s snRNA‐seq study on AD brains 101 (Figure 2A , 102 ). FIGURE 2 Venn diagrams of omics data integration. A, Genes with DEX in developmental DS brains and single‐nucleus transcriptomics in AD brains. B, Genes with DEX in developmental DS brains and genes identified in AD GWAS and AD EWAS. C, Genes with DEX in AD proteome and genes encoded by Chr21. D, Genes with DEX in AD proteome and genes with DEX in developmental DS brains. Venn diagrams were generated using the VennDiagram package. 102 AD, Alzheimer's disease; ASC, astrocytes; Chr21, chromosome 21; DEX, differential expression; DS, Down syndrome; EWAS, epigenome‐wide association studies; GWAS, genome‐wide association studies; MG, microglia; ODCs, oligodendrocytes. In addition to the roles of neurons and vascular dysfunction, it is essential to recognize the crucial contribution of non‐neuronal cells to the pathogenesis of DS‐AD, as they play key roles in amyloid clearance, neuroinflammation, and maintaining overall brain homeostasis. The findings from the transcriptomics studies on AD brains, which reveal genome‐wide alterations in gene expression in non‐neuronal cells ODC, MG, and ASC, open important avenues for further exploration into their role in DS‐AD pathogenesis. ODC, MG, and ASC collectively contribute to the intricate cellular environment of the brain and are implicated in different aspects of AD. Dysfunction in these cell types can contribute to the pathogenesis of AD, affecting myelination, immune responses, Aβ clearance, and overall brain homeostasis. 103 , 104 , 105 Remarkably, GFAP was upregulated in all three cell types. A subset of genes ( n = 75) exhibiting differential expression in developmental DS brains was found of t‐DEX in all three cell types—ODC, MG, and ASC—in AD brains. Over‐representation analysis highlighted five Gene Ontology biological process (GO‐BP) gene sets, including cell junction organization, regulation of membrane potential, cell‐substrate adhesion, synapse organization, and axon development (Table 1 ). All these BPs are closely linked to AD pathology. For instance, disturbances in the organization of cell junctions, particularly the impairment of BBB function, has been recognized as a significant contributor to AD pathology. 106 Minor changes in membrane potential may alter the firing characteristics of neurons, resulting in substantial dysfunction in the brain. 107 Although these changes have been identified, the crucial task remains to ascertain whether they are a primary driver of the disease or a consequence of its progression. This distinction is pivotal for a deeper understanding of the disease mechanism and could be instrumental in guiding future research efforts aimed at developing targeted therapies for DS‐AD. TABLE 1 Overrepresented Gene Ontology biological processes with DEX in developmental and adult DS brains and t‐DEX in oligodendrocytes (ODC), microglia (MG), and astrocytes (ASC) in AD brains. a Gene set Description Size Expect Ratio p FDR Genes GO:0034330 Cell junction organization 285 1.33 6.78 6.59E‐06 0.0056 APOD, BCL2, CDH12, GJA1, NFASC, PARD3, PTPRJ, TESK2, TGFB2 GO:0042391 Regulation of membrane potential 414 1.93 4.67 0.000123 0.0423 AKAP6, BCL2, GJA1, GRIN1, GRIN2A, GRM1, KCNE4, KCNH8, KCNQ3 GO:0031589 Cell‐substrate adhesion 332 1.55 5.17 0.000149 0.0423 APOD, BCL2, CD44, EPHB1, MERTK, PTPRJ, SEMA3E, TESK2 GO:0050808 Synapse organization 385 1.79 4.46 0.000407 0.0729 CNTN2, COL4A1, EPHB1, ERC2, GRIN1, NFASC, SEMA3E, SPARCL1 GO:0061564 Axon development 490 2.28 3.94 0.000429 0.0729 APOD, BCL2, CNTN2, EPHB1, GRIN1, NCAM2, NFASC, PARD3, SEMA3E , Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer's disease; DEX, differential expression; DS, Down syndrome; FDR, false discovery rate; t‐DEX, trajectory differential expression. a Seventy‐five genes with DEX in the DS brain and t‐DEX in the three cell types in the AD brain: ACSL1, ACSS3, AGBL4, AKAP6, ALDH1L1, AOAH, APOD, ARHGAP10, ASPH, BCL2, CABLES1, CADPS, CD44, CDH12, CEBPD, CNTN2, COL4A1, CSMD1, DLGAP2, ELL2, EPB41, EPHB1, EPN2, ERC2, EYA2, FAM49B, FRAS1, GALNT2, GJA1, GRIN1, GRIN2A, GRM1, HECW1, HIF3A, HS3ST5, KCNE4, KCNH8, KCNQ3, LDLRAD3, LIMK2, MED12L, MERTK, NCAM2, NFASC, NKAIN3, NR4A1, NT5DC1, OSMR, PARD3, PARP8, PELI1, PKNOX2, PLSCR4, POU6F2, PRAM1, PTPRJ, PYGL, RAB31, RFX4, RNF220, RYR3, SEMA3E, SLC14A1, SLC25A13, SNAP91, SPARCL1, SRGAP1, STK33, STON2, TESK2, TGFB2, THSD4, TMTC2, TNFAIP8, YAP1 . Over‐representation analysis by the WebGestalt (WEB‐based Gene SeT AnaLysis Toolkit) web tool. 108 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. 3.4 Integrating DS transcriptomics and AD genetics Integrating genetic findings with transcriptomic data provides deeper insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying DS‐AD. In dorsal frontal cortex (DFC, related to long‐term memory encoding 109 ), β‐secretase 1 ( BACE1 ), and PSEN1 (its rare variants correlated with familial AD by affecting Aβ precursor processing) showed lower expression in developmental DS brains. 36 In addition, downregulation of PSEN2 expression has been observed in the adult DS brain by Lockstone et al. 37 β‐secretase is responsible for the initial cleavage for APP, 110 while γ‐secretase encoded by PSEN1 and PSEN2 cleaves the remaining membrane‐bound C‐terminal fragment of APP following the action of β‐secretase. Inhibitors of BACE1 have been a major focus in the development of treatments to reduce plaque formation. 111 These paradox changes of BACE1 and PSEN1 expression in developmental DS brains, where one might expect higher activity to correlate with AD progression, suggest that β‐ and γ‐secretase inhibitors may not be the focus in DS‐AD treatment. In cerebellar cortex (CBC, contributing to both the deterioration of motor functions and cognitive impairments 112 ), APOE had higher expression in developmental DS brains. In addition, a number of AD‐associated genes identified by GWASs were also identified of DEX in the DS brain (Figure 2B ). In DFC, AD‐associated genes heparan sulfate‐glucosamine 3‐sulfotransferase 5 ( HS3ST5 , chr6), granulin precursor ( GRN , chr17), and pleckstrin homology domain containing A1 ( PLEKHA1 , chr10) were downregulated in DS patients; signal peptide peptidase like 2A ( SPPL2A , chr15), and FERM domain containing kindlin 2 ( FERMT2 , chr14), were upregulated in DS patients. In CBC, AD‐associated gene PLEKHA1 was downregulated in DS patients; protein kinase D3 ( PRKD3 , chr2), SPPL2A , and FERMT2 , were upregulated in DS patients (Table 2 ). This observation underscores their altered expression levels in DS‐AD. The inference that common AD‐associated genetic variants may exacerbate the risk of DS‐AD adds a layer of complexity to our understanding. Importantly, the genes with altered expression levels in DS and influenced by AD‐associated variants may serve as potential therapeutic targets. TABLE 2 AD‐associated genes with DEX in DS brains. Gene Functional role Mechanistic insights Relevance to DS‐AD Downregulated in DS brains HS3ST5 Encodes a sulfotransferase, adding sulfate groups to heparan sulfate, enabling normal heparan sulfate function. 113 In AD brains, heparan sulfate binds and accelerates Aβ aggregation, mediates Aβ internalization, and induces cytotoxicity. 114 It also binds tau, influencing secretion, internalization, and aggregation. 115 Downregulation disrupts heparan sulfate sulfation patterns, potentially exacerbating Aβ aggregation and tau pathology. Aberrant heparan sulfate sulfation may amplify Aβ‐mediated cytotoxicity and tau interactions, worsening DS‐AD pathology. GRN Encodes granulin precursor, cleaved into active peptides (granulins/epithelins) that function as growth factors. 116 , 117 GRN mutations are implicated in neurodegenerative diseases such as frontotemporal lobar degeneration 118 , 119 and Lewy body dementia. 120 Downregulation GRN may compromise neuronal maintenance and repair mechanisms. 121 Reduced granulin levels may compromise neuronal resilience and exacerbate neurodegeneration in DS‐AD. PLEKHA1 Encodes a plasma membrane protein that binds phosphatidylinositol 3,4‐bisphosphate, playing a role in signaling complex formation. 122 In neurons, PLEKHA1 is involved in synaptic signaling and APP processing. 123 Downregulation may disrupt membrane functions, leading to impaired APP metabolism and Aβ accumulation. Variants are also linked to hypothyroidism, 124 autoimmune thyroid disease, 125 and other autoimmune diseases. 126 Downregulation may exacerbate synaptic dysfunction and Aβ pathology, contributing to DS‐AD progression. Upregulated in DS brains SPPL2A Encodes an intramembrane protease that degrades CD74, the invariant chain of MHC class II, impacting antigen presentation and immune response. 127 Upregulation in microglia may alter immune responses by degrading CD74, enhancing neuroinflammation. Elevated SPPL2A levels during early Aβ‐mediated processes may create a feedback loop, intensifying Aβ production and pathology. 128 Upregulated SPPL2A may drive neuroinflammation and exacerbate Aβ pathology in DS‐AD. FERMT2 Encodes a protein integral to extracellular matrix structures, 129 modulating Aβ and tau proteostasis in neuronal cells. 130 Genome‐wide siRNA screening identifies FERMT2 as a key modulator of APP metabolism. 131 Underexpression of FERMT2 is correlated with increased Aβ peptide production, attributed to elevated levels of mature APP at the cell surface and an enhanced recycling. 131 In contrast, depletion reduces phosphorylated tau and extracellular Aβ. 130 FERMT2 is a regulator of proteostasis, and excessive activity could disrupt the fine‐tuned balance of APP metabolism and tau regulation. PRKD3 Encodes a kinase involved in vesicle trafficking and signaling pathways, 132 with emerging links to synaptic function and neuroinflammation. 133 Overexpression of PRKD3 may disrupt neuronal signaling and contribute to inflammation. It is a potential therapeutic target for AD, with midostaurin, an FDA‐approved multi‐targeted protein kinase inhibitor for the treatment of both solid and non‐solid tumors, being explored to modulate PRKD3 activity. 133 Dysregulated PRKD3 activity may aggravate neuroinflammation and synaptic deficits in DS‐AD. Abbreviations: Aβ, amyloid beta; AD, Alzheimer's disease; DEX, differential expression; DS, Down syndrome; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. 3.5 Perspective and limitations of transcriptomics Taken together, transcriptomics studies offer insights into the intricate molecular mechanisms of AD risk in individuals with DS, providing valuable information on potential therapeutic targets and intervention pathways. For example, interventions aimed at normalizing the expression of genes involved in ODC development or myelination processes could be beneficial. 134 Lifestyle interventions aimed at enhancing brain plasticity and resilience may also be effective in counteracting the transcriptomic alterations associated with DS‐AD. 135 The identification of gene expression alterations in specific cell types and brain regions unveils the complex interactions contributing to AD pathogenesis in the context of DS. Building on these findings, the observed transcriptomic changes in genes harboring AD‐associated genetic variants highlight their significance in identifying potential therapeutic approaches. However, it is crucial to note that, while these genes possess AD‐associated variants, the direct influence of these variants on the transcriptomic alterations in DS, and any potential interactions with T21, including but not limited to epistatic effects, gene dosage impacts, epigenetic modifications, and alterations in signaling pathways, remains to be fully elucidated. Future research should therefore prioritize clarifying the relationships between these AD‐associated genetic variants and the unique transcriptomic profiles observed in individuals with DS. Nevertheless, while transcriptomics is a powerful and informative tool in DS and AD research, it is important to maintain caution. The potential for bias exists due to the more informative nature of transcriptomic studies compared to other ‐omic approaches, which might skew the perception of intervention opportunities. Therefore, corroborative evidence from additional ‐omic technologies is crucial to validate and support these potential interventions. For example, transcriptomic profiling identifies dysregulated genes involved in ODC development and myelination processes. Proteomics can reveal protein levels, post‐translational modifications (PTMs), protein isoforms, and interactions crucial for these processes. Meanwhile, metabolomics provides insights into metabolic disturbances affecting ODC function. Integrating other ‐omics data may further enrich our understanding, allowing for a holistic exploration of the multifaceted molecular signatures associated with DS‐AD. These comprehensive data facilitate the identification of promising targets for interventions. Furthermore, predictive models using multi‐omics data can determine the optimal timing for interventions. In the following sections, we will explore how other ‐omics approaches further elucidate the molecular landscape of DS‐AD, complement transcriptomic insights, and provide a more holistic understanding of the multifaceted mechanisms underlying this condition. 4 EPIGENOMICS INSIGHTS INTO DS‐AD 4.1 Integrating AD epigenomics with DS brain transcriptomics Epigenomics is important for its unique focus on the regulation of gene expression through heritable and reversible modifications. Its dynamic nature, involvement in development and disease, and potential for therapeutic interventions make epigenomics a critical component in the broader landscape of ‐omics sciences. Epigenomics has proven to be a valuable tool in unraveling the complexities of DS‐AD, laying the groundwork for future therapeutic strategies and interventions. 136 , 137 Notably, the epigenomic analyses of the fetal DS cortex have revealed significant alterations in DNA methylation patterns, showing an increase in both hypermethylated and hypomethylated CpG sites throughout the genome. 138 Accelerated epigenetic aging in the blood of individuals with DS has been observed prenatally. 139 Furthermore, the discovery of accelerated epigenetic aging in adult DS, as measured by the epigenetic clock, 140 elucidates that DS significantly increases the biological age of blood and brain tissue by an average of 6.6 years based on DNA methylation levels. 141 Epigenetic alterations, including changes in histone acetylation and DNA methylation, affect multiple genes involved in AD pathology in vulnerable brain regions, with potential implications for therapeutic approaches like epigenomic engineering ( supporting information ). Among the AD epigenome‐wide association study (EWAS) genes, 142 eight genes were identified of DEX in developmental DS brain, including seven genes upregulated in developmental DS brain (in DFC: PCNT, C10orf99, RHBDF2 ; in CBC: SLC15A2, CPEB4, GJB6, HOXB1 ), and one gene RNF112 downregulated in developmental DS CBC. 36 In the adult DS brain, two genes were upregulated, ABLIM1 (GO:0009887, organogenesis) and RHOB (GO:0007049, cell cycle). Conversely, two genes were downregulated, ANK1 (GO:0007010, cytoskeleton organization and biogenesis) and SPN (GO:0006968, cellular defense response). 37 4.2 Functional insights from key epigenetically altered genes The upregulated genes in developmental DS brains participate in diverse cellular processes. The pericentrin gene ( PCNT ) at Chr21q22.3 is involved in organizing cellular structures, particularly the centrosome. 143 The centrosome is a cellular organelle that serves as the main microtubule‐organizing center in animal cells. It plays a pivotal role in various cellular processes, including cell division, intracellular transport, and the maintenance of cell structure. 144 Overexpression of PCNT in DS is related to the presence of an extra copy of Chr21. The identification of PCNT as a locus in AD EWAS implies that this gene is sensitive to changes in gene dosage. Other genes are located on different autochromosomes. C10orf99 (encoding G protein‐coupled receptor 15 ligand, GPR15LG ) at Chr10q23.1 encodes a cytokine, 145 potentially contributing to neuroinflammation. The rhomboid 5 homolog 2 gene ( RHBDF2 ) at Chr17q25.1 regulates epidermal growth factor signaling and controls the activation and substrate selectivity of ADAM metallopeptidase domain 17 (ADAM17)‐dependent shedding events, for example, the ectodomain shedding of tumor necrosis factor α. 146 The solute carrier family 15 member 2 gene ( SLC15A2 ) at Chr3q13.33 encodes a proton‐coupled peptide transporter, possibly maintaining the integrity and selective permeability of the BBB. 147 The cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein gene 4 ( CPEB4 ) at Chr5q35.2, containing unstructured low complexity domains (LCDs), can form nucleolar aggregates and may mediate AD pathology. 148 The gap junction protein beta 6 gene ( GJB6 ) at Chr13q12.11 encodes connexin 30, integral to gap junctions. 149 Connexin 43, encoded by the gap junction protein alpha 1 gene ( GJA1 ), is a significant player in AD pathogenesis. Sustained GJA1 upregulation can cause neuronal strain, leading to eventual cellular degeneration and death. 150 The homeobox B1 gene ( HOXB1 ) at Chr17q21.32 encodes a transcription factor with an essential role in morphogenesis. A subpopulation of noradrenergic neurons with developmental HOXB1 expression plays a unique role in modulating stress‐related behavior. 151 In contrast to the above upregulated genes, the ring finger protein 112 gene ( RNF112 ) at Chr17p11.2 is downregulated in developmental DS brains. RNF112 , also known as neurolastin, belongs to the RING finger protein family of transcription factors and is a brain‐specific dynamin family GTPase with functional GTPase and RING domains. It plays a crucial role in dendritic spine formation, synaptic function, and synaptic plasticity during development. 152 Mice lacking the Rnf112 gene ( Rnf112 −/−) had smaller brains compared to wild‐type littermates, with impairments in brain functions, specifically affecting motor balance, spatial learning, and memory. 153 In the adult DS brain, the genes exhibit a shift toward processes associated with neurodegeneration, such as ABLIM1 and RHOB , which are upregulated and linked to cell cycle dysregulation and cytoskeletal dynamics, and impaired cellular defense and cytoskeletal organization, reflected in the downregulation of ANK1 and SPN . These changes signify the onset of neurodegenerative mechanisms. This transition reflects an age‐related evolution of the molecular profile in DS brains, moving from developmental dysregulation in early life to mechanisms driving neurodegeneration in adulthood. These genes, identified in AD EWASs, highlight an epigenetic regulatory influence in AD and a transcriptomic shift in DS, suggesting intersecting pathways that converge on DS and neurodegenerative processes. The converged pathways originate in the developmental stage and transition in adulthood and may serve as potential therapeutic targets for gene‐specific epigenetic editing. 154 4.3 Perspective and limitations of epigenomics The integration of epigenomics with DS‐AD research opens avenues for targeted therapeutic strategies, including gene‐specific epigenetic editing. When integrated with transcriptomics, it offers a synergistic and comprehensive understanding of the molecular mechanisms underpinning DS‐AD. The recognition of epigenetic alterations in AD‐susceptible brain regions highlights the importance of these modifications in the disease process, offering possibilities for intervention. Specifically, understanding the roles of DYRK1A , DNMT3L , and other identified genes in DS epigenetics is essential for advancing the potential of epigenomic interventions in the treatment and understanding of both DS and AD. Drugs that specifically target epigenetic modifications, such as inhibitors of DNA methylation or histone deacetylases (HDACs), 155 could be tailored to normalize the epigenetic marks associated with AD pathology. The potential for using epigenome editing tools, like CRISPR‐dCas9 systems equipped with epigenetic modifiers, offers a futuristic but highly promising approach to directly correct the aberrant epigenetic landscape in DS‐AD. 156 Furthermore, lifestyle and environmental interventions that can positively influence the epigenome, such as diet, physical exercise, and cognitive engagement, present non‐invasive strategies to mitigate AD risk in DS. 157 Despite these promising avenues, there remain significant challenges in fully understanding and using epigenomics in DS‐AD research. The heterogeneity of epigenetic modifications across different brain regions and cell types 138 necessitates more refined, cell‐specific epigenomic mapping techniques. Additionally, while tools like CRISPR‐dCas9 provide immense therapeutic potential, their safety, precision, and long‐term effects require extensive preclinical and clinical validation. Future studies must also address the dynamic nature of epigenetic changes over time, particularly in response to aging and environmental factors, to better understand their impact on DS‐AD progression. Integrating other ‐omics approaches with epigenomics will help overcome current limitations and provide a holistic understanding of the molecular networks driving DS‐AD pathogenesis. 5 PROTEOMIC FINDINGS 5.1 Integration of AD brain proteomics with DS brain transcriptomics The correlations between plasma protein biomarkers of Aβ40 and Aβ42, total tau, and NfL with cognitive and functional impairments in DS adults have been demonstrated by a large cross‐sectional cohort study. 158 The investigation into brain proteomics further accelerates advancements in AD and DS research. Pires et al. identified secernin‐1 (SCRN1) as a novel p‐tau binding protein, predominantly accumulating in AD, DS‐AD, and primary age‐related tauopathy (PART). 159 The proteomic findings of AD in the general population are discussed in Table S2 in supporting information. Among the proteomic findings, key AD‐related proteins encoded by APP , MAPT (encoding tau), GFAP , and NEFL (encoding NfL) are all upregulated in AD brains. 160 Discrepancies in proteomics findings for AD may arise due to technical differences between studies, such as variations in assay sensitivity, platform type, or sample handling, as well as small sample sizes that limit statistical power and contribute to inconsistent results. 161 , 162 In this regard, comparing AD brain proteomics with DS genetics and brain transcriptomics helps corroborate proteomic findings. Notably, two layers of associations between AD and DS are suggested by AD brain proteomics with 1483 proteins upregulated and 1214 proteins downregulated. 160 While 15 out of 1483 upregulated proteins are encoded by Chr21, only 4 of 1214 downregulated proteins are encoded by Chr21 ( p = 0.035), implying a link between increased Chr21 dosage in DS and AD pathogenesis (Figure 2C ). Furthermore, consistent changes were observed in the developmental DS brain transcriptome: 36 105 upregulated proteins have been upregulated in the developmental DS brain transcriptome, and 41 upregulated proteins have been downregulated in the developmental DS brain transcriptome (Figure 2D , 105/620 vs. 41/631, p = 8.98E‐09); 101 downregulated proteins have been downregulated in the developmental DS brain transcriptome, and 7 downregulated proteins have been upregulated in the developmental DS brain transcriptome (101/631 vs. 7/620, p = 7.42E‐21). These consistent changes of AD brain proteome and developmental DS brain transcriptome further underscore the associations between DS and AD risk. Several biologically significant processes (BPs) have been identified with high statistical significance (Table 3 ), offering critical insights into how DS contributes to AD pathology (Table 4 ). TABLE 3 overrepresented Gene Ontology biological process with DEX in the AD brain proteome and developmental and the adult DS brain transcriptome. a Gene set Description Size Expect Ratio P FDR a. Upregulated AD proteins and upregulated RNAs in developmental DS brain GO:0007015 Actin filament organization 388 2.65 5.29 3.69E‐07 0.0002 GO:0034330 Cell junction organization 285 1.94 6.17 5.32E‐07 0.0002 GO:0002446 Neutrophil mediated immunity 496 3.38 4.14 6.61E‐06 0.0015 GO:0036230 Granulocyte activation 500 3.41 4.10 7.25E‐06 0.0015 GO:1902903 Regulation of supramolecular fiber organization 329 2.24 4.90 1.48E‐05 0.0023 GO:0031589 Cell‐substrate adhesion 332 2.26 4.86 1.61E‐05 0.0023 GO:0071559 Response to transforming growth factor beta 238 1.62 5.54 3.56E‐05 0.0037 GO:0032970 Regulation of actin filament‐based process 362 2.47 4.45 3.56E‐05 0.0037 GO:1990778 Protein localization to cell periphery 301 2.05 4.87 3.90E‐05 0.0037 GO:0007229 Integrin‐mediated signaling pathway 101 0.69 8.71 6.51E‐05 0.0055 b. Downregulated AD proteins and downregulated RNAs in developmental DS brain GO:0050905 Neuromuscular process 107 0.63 9.54 3.89E‐05 0.0330 GO:0014075 Response to amine 44 0.26 15.47 1.26E‐04 0.0461 GO:0099177 Regulation of trans‐synaptic signaling 417 2.45 4.08 1.63E‐04 0.0461 GO:0097366 Response to bronchodilator 51 0.30 13.35 2.25E‐04 0.0478 GO:0051648 Vesicle localization 305 1.79 4.46 4.22E‐04 0.0717 GO:0001505 Regulation of neurotransmitter levels 335 1.97 4.06 7.81E‐04 0.0935 GO:0031644 Regulation of neurological system process 128 0.75 6.65 9.36E‐04 0.0935 GO:0099504 Synaptic vesicle cycle 193 1.13 5.29 9.55E‐04 0.0935 GO:0006836 Neurotransmitter transport 268 1.57 4.45 1.00E‐03 0.0935 GO:0099003 Vesicle‐mediated transport in synapse 203 1.19 5.03 1.24E‐03 0.0935 c. Upregulated AD proteins and upregulated RNAs in adult DS brain GO:0007264 Small GTPase mediated signal transduction 493 1.32 6.80 4.81E‐06 0.0040 GO:0022604 Regulation of cell morphogenesis 243 0.65 9.20 4.25E‐05 0.0135 GO:1902903 Regulation of supramolecular fiber organization 375 1.01 6.96 5.48E‐05 0.0135 GO:0055094 Response to lipoprotein particle 31 0.08 36.07 7.63E‐05 0.0135 GO:0014812 Muscle cell migration 86 0.23 17.34 8.05E‐05 0.0135 GO:0071402 Cellular response to lipoprotein particle stimulus 34 0.09 32.89 1.01E‐04 0.0141 GO:0097242 Amyloid beta clearance 37 0.10 30.22 1.30E‐04 0.0156 GO:0044703 Multi‐organism reproductive process 199 0.53 9.37 1.81E‐04 0.0190 GO:0044706 Multi‐multicellular organism process 207 0.56 9.00 2.18E‐04 0.0194 GO:0007229 Integrin‐mediated signaling pathway 113 0.30 13.20 2.32E‐04 0.0194 Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer's disease; DEX, differential expression; DS, Down syndrome; FDR, false discovery rate; ORA, over‐representation analysis. a ORA by the WebGestalt (WEB‐based Gene SeT AnaLysis Toolkit) web tool. 108 a. 105 AD upregulated proteins and upregulated in DS brain transcriptome: SEPT2, ACSM5, ACSS3, ADD3, ALDH1L1, ANP32B, APAF1, APOE, APPL2, ARPC1B, ASPH, BBOX1, BBS2, BCL2, C5AR1, CD44, COL4A1, COMT, CRLF3, CSK, CTNNA1, CYBRD1, DARS, DBF4B, DKK3, DPY19L3, EPB41, EPS15, F11R, FERMT2, FKBP5, FLT1, GALM, GDF10, GJA1, GLUD1, GPC4, GRAMD3, H1F0, HADHA, HCLS1, HEATR5A, HMGN1, HSDL2, HVCN1, IFI30, IFT122, INPPL1, ITGAL, ITGB4, ITGB8, ITM2C, KIF5B, LAIR1, LDHB, LIX1, METTL7A, MGST1, MT1A, NEK6, NOTCH2, NPL, NUBP2, PARD3, PECAM1, PHKA2, PLCD1, PLP2, PLSCR4, PRAM1, PRCP, PRMT2, PSTPIP1, PTTG1IP, PXN, PYGL, RAB31, RASA4, RDX, RELL1, RNF114, S100A10, S100B, SDC4, SEC14L2, SLC15A2, SLC6A11, SON, SRGAP1, SSPN, STK33, STON2, SYTL4, TAX1BP3, TGFB2, TMOD3, TP53BP2, TRIP10, TWF1, UNC119B, UNC13D, VASN, VSIG4, WASF2, YAP1 ; b. 101 AD downregulated proteins and downregulated in DS brain transcriptome: ABLIM2, ACHE, ACTR3B, ADAM11, ADAP1, AGBL4, AP3B2, ARFGAP1, ARFGAP2, ARHGEF2, ASAP2, ASTN1, ATP2B3, ATP5H, BAI1, BCL2L2, BDNF, BRSK2, C2CD2L, CA4, CADPS, CBLN4, CDH12, CDK5R2, CECR6, COX5B, CSMD1, DIRAS1, DLAT, DLGAP2, DLK2, DPYSL4, DUSP3, DYNC1LI1, EFNA3, EFR3B, EPHB6, ERC2, EXOC6, FAM131B, FAM134A, FAM49B, GRIN1, GRIN2A, GTPBP10, HECW1, HPRT1, HSPA12A, HYOU1, IGSF8, KCNH1, KCNQ3, LARP1B, LIMK1, MET, MGST3, MRPL2, NDUFS2, NFASC, NGEF, NLGN2, NPTX2, NRBF2, NUMBL, PCSK1, PDCD6IP, PGBD5, PIK3R4, PIP5K1C, PLEKHA1, PLXNA1, PNKD, PORCN, RDH14, RGS4, ROGDI, RPH3A, SERAC1, SH3RF1, SLC25A44, SLC27A4, SLC7A8, SNX4, SYNGAP1, SYNGR3, SYT12, TBC1D10B, TFRC, TMEM163, TMEM177, TMEM38A, TPPP, TRIM3, TSC22D2, TTC39C, TTC9B, UBXN6, UQCRC1, VPS36, WDR7, ZDHHC5 . 41 upregulated proteins and downregulated in DS brain transcriptome: ACSL1, BACE1, C9orf142, CLCN7, CTSD, DAGLB, DHX16, FARP2, FBL, FRZB, GNA11, GRN, GTPBP2, H2AFY, HMGA1, LACTB2, LIPA, MAP3K2, NFKB1, NUP210, OSTM1, PCIF1, PDYN, PES1, PGAM2, PLXNB1, PRKCI, PTBP1, QSOX1, RCC2, RHPN2, RING1, RNPEP, RRAGA, SLC39A14, SLC6A9, SMYD5, STIM2, TRAM1, UNC5B, WDR46 ; 7 downregulated proteins and upregulated in DS brain transcriptome: FAM49A, GJB6, ITSN1, MKLN1, PURG, SCO1, SNAP91 ; c. 44 upregulated proteins with upregulation in the adult DS brain: ARFGAP3, PDE4DIP, NIPBL, EEF1A1, CRK, RECK, METAP2, RPS6KA5, SMARCA1, CAPG, STXBP3, CLU, NECAP2, SON, RAB9A, WASF2, PEA15, FABP7, RBPJ, SMC3, APOE, ITGB4, EPS8, SNX2, NOTCH2, ITGB1, SPARC, DDR1, SEPT10, PLXNB1, SEPT2, CPNE3, PLTP, IGFBP5, FAM107A, SMC1A, HLA‐DRB1, OSBPL11, ITGB2, RDX, HLA‐DRA, CA2, SPP1, ADAMTS1 . John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. TABLE 4 Insights from overrepresented Gene Ontology biological process in AD brain proteomics and DS brain transcriptomes. Gene set Functional role Mechanistic insights Relevance to DS‐AD a. Upregulated AD proteins and upregulated RNAs in the developmental DS brain GO:0007015 actin filament organization Maintains cellular structure and function. Disruptions in actin filament organization alter neuronal structure, affecting synaptic integrity and plasticity. 163 , 164 Upregulation of actin filament organization in DS‐AD may initially compensate for cytoskeletal instability. However, persistent abnormalities in actin dynamics can disrupt synaptic function. GO:0034330 cell junction organization Regulates the integrity of the BBB. Alterations in cell junctions increase BBB permeability, allowing harmful substances (e.g., neurotoxic agents) to enter the brain. 165 , 166 Upregulated cell junction organization genes may reflect a response to BBB dysfunction in DS‐AD. GO:0002446 neutrophil mediated immunity Contributes to immune defense and inflammation. Systemic inflammation have been underlined in AD pathogenesis. 167 Hyperactivation of neutrophils promotes neuroinflammation and oxidative stress, releasing pro‐inflammatory mediators. 168 Neutrophil hyperactivation have been suggested of association with the rate of cognitive decline in AD. 169 Upregulated neutrophil‐mediated immunity in DS‐AD may drive chronic inflammation, accelerating neurodegeneration and cognitive decline. GO:0071559 response to transforming growth factor beta Regulates neuronal development and synaptic plasticity. Dysfunction in TGF‐β signaling increases Aβ deposition and NFT formation. 170 The perturbation of TGF‐β signaling underscores the intricate relationship between trophic factor responses, synaptic plasticity, and the neurodegenerative processes in DS‐AD. b. Downregulated AD proteins and downregulated RNAs in developmental DS brain GO:0014075 response to amine Supports neurotransmission and synaptic signaling. Changes in response to dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine impact neuronal survival and synaptic function. 171 Disrupted neurotransmitter signaling is highlighted in DS‐AD. GO:0051648 vesicle localization Ensures proper neurotransmitter release. 172 Disruptions in vesicle transport and localization impair synaptic neurotransmitter release. 173 Downregulated vesicle localization genes in DS‐AD leads to synaptic dysfunction and communication deficits. c. Upregulated AD proteins and upregulated RNAs in adult DS brain GO:0007264 Small GTPase mediated signal transduction Regulates intracellular signaling, cytoskeletal dynamics, and vesicle trafficking. Dysregulation affects synaptic plasticity and neuronal communication. 174 Upregulation may reflect attempts to compensate for impaired signaling but could contribute to disrupted neuronal connectivity. GO:1902903 Regulation of supramolecular fiber organization Maintains cytoskeletal integrity and extracellular matrix structure. Impaired fiber organization leads to cytoskeletal instability and extracellular matrix remodeling. 175 May compensate for cellular stress but eventually contribute to structural brain deterioration. GO:0071402 Cellular response to lipoprotein particle stimulus Drives cellular adaptations to lipid‐related signals, including inflammatory responses. Links to amyloid processing and neuroinflammation through altered lipid metabolism. 176 May exacerbate inflammatory cascades, promoting AD pathology in DS. GO:0097242 Aβ clearance Removes Aβ peptides to prevent plaque accumulation. Impaired clearance exacerbates amyloid aggregation and neuronal toxicity. Reflects efforts to mitigate amyloid burden. Abbreviations: Aβ, amyloid beta; AD, Alzheimer's disease; BBB, blood–brain barrier; DS, Down syndrome; NFT, neurofibrillary tangle. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. While increased expression of Chr21 genes occurs due to T21, certain proteins encoded by Chr21 show reduced levels in AD proteomics. Among the seven downregulated proteins with upregulated RNAs in the DS brain, the intersectin 1 gene ( ITSN1 ) at Chr21q22.11 is a notable example. ITSN1 is involved in regulating clathrin‐coated vesicle formation and synaptic vesicle recycling. 177 Interestingly, while ITSN1 RNA is upregulated in DS brains due to T21, there is an observed reduction in the brain levels of ITSN1 compared to younger counterparts. 178 Further insights are gained from changes observed in AD brain proteomics and the adult DS brain transcriptome. A total of 44 upregulated proteins align with upregulation in the adult DS brain transcriptome, while 2 upregulated proteins show downregulation in adult DS brain transcriptome (44/138 vs. 2/55, p = 5.53E‐04). Several BPs have been highlighted by these genes with statistical significance (Table 3 ). Similarly, 10 downregulated proteins align with downregulation in the adult DS brain transcriptome, while 3 downregulated proteins show upregulation in the adult DS brain transcriptome (10/55 vs. 3/138, p = 8.74E‐04). These consistent changes between the AD brain proteome and the adult DS brain transcriptome further underscore the associations between DS and AD risk. While the downregulated genes are fewer in number and lack significant enrichment for specific BP gene sets, they are involved in critical pathways such as synaptic transmission, potassium ion transport, protein amino acid dephosphorylation, small GTPase‐mediated signal transduction, and cytoskeleton organization and biogenesis. 37 Compared to the developmental DS brain, the focus in adult DS brain shifts toward cellular signaling and physiological responses that may reflect compensatory or degenerative mechanisms. The upregulation of small GTPase‐mediated signaling and cell morphogenesis regulation underscores ongoing cellular adaptations, while pathways like Aβ clearance and responses to lipoproteins suggest a shift toward addressing AD pathology in the adult DS brain. 5.2 Amyloid plaque analysis and PTMs in AD and DS‐AD post mortem older adult brains A recent proteome study revealed that the amyloid plaques found in sporadic EOAD and DS‐AD post mortem older adult brains share common proteins, yet there are variations in the levels of certain proteins between the two. 179 While the fundamental mechanisms of amyloid plaque formation may be shared, the differing levels of specific proteins could contribute to the distinct pathological trajectories observed in EOAD and DS‐AD. For example, proteins such as SMOC1 (SPARC‐related modular calcium binding 1) and phosphorylated Aβ were significantly enriched in DS‐AD plaques, while higher levels of oligomeric Aβ were observed in EOAD plaques. SMOC1 is a matricellular protein involved in cellular signaling and the regulation of extracellular matrix components. 180 Its protein levels are known to be elevated in the AD brain. 181 The enrichment of SMOC1 in DS‐AD plaques indicates a potential mechanistic role for extracellular matrix dysregulation in driving the accelerated and early‐onset amyloid deposition observed in DS‐AD. AD proteomics reveals potential therapeutic targets through identified proteins, pathways, and the intricate interplay between genetic factors and molecular processes, emphasizing the need for targeted interventions to mitigate neurodegenerative processes. Importantly, oxidative stress has been implicated in contributing to neurodegeneration in the brains of individuals with DS, 182 as well as in AD in the general population. 183 The integration of DS transcriptomic data enhances our understanding of how specific molecular mechanisms influence the proteomic landscape in DS‐AD. Additionally, the discovered associations between altered protein profiles and disease progression suggest the potential development of biomarkers, reflective of the specific risk present in individuals with DS, for early detection and disease monitoring in DS‐AD. The complex landscape of PTMs revealed in AD pathogenesis ( supporting information ), particularly the role of oxidative stress, offers unique opportunities for designing interventions that target specific modification pathways. Addressing oxidative stress in the context of DS‐AD becomes particularly important, given its significant role in the pathogenesis of both DS and AD. 5.3 Perspective and limitations of proteomics The foundational knowledge of specific protein alterations linked to DS‐AD pathogenesis opens avenues for developing targeted therapies. Specifically, using small molecule inhibitors to target proteins involved in actin filament or cell junction organization could help restore cellular and synaptic integrity. Additionally, antioxidant treatments that mitigate oxidative stress–induced protein modifications could unveil new therapeutic directions. However, insights from AD proteomics integrated with AD genetics also call for caution. The triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 ( TREM2 ) is associated with the genetic risk for AD, with loss‐of‐function mutations impairing microglial functions essential for managing AD pathology. 184 Agonistic anti‐ TREM2 antibodies, which bind directly to TREM2 and activate its signaling pathways, enhance microglial function, improving clearance of amyloid plaques and cellular debris. 184 However, the immunotherapy approach targeting TREM2 is controversial. TREM2 overexpression is observed in AD brain proteomics, though it is likely a compensatory response to ongoing neurodegeneration. Increased TREM2 levels contribute to chronic inflammation by stimulating the ongoing release of inflammatory cytokines. 185 Therefore, the therapeutic focus may need to prioritize restoring the impaired function of specific TREM2 variants rather than simply enhancing TREM2 activity. While proteomic studies have yielded valuable insights into DS‐AD pathogenesis, discrepancies in proteomic datasets often arise due to variability in methodologies, sample handling, and data analysis. Addressing these challenges requires the refinement of proteomic methodologies and the standardization of experimental protocols to improve reproducibility. Delving deeper into disease proteomics entails advanced strategies such as subcellular localization profiling using techniques like subcellular fractionation coupled with mass spectrometry to uncover the spatial distribution of proteins within cellular compartments. 186 Dynamic quantitative proteomics approaches enable the exploration of temporal changes in protein expression and turnover rates, offering insights into disease progression dynamics. 187 Single‐cell proteomics technologies dissect cellular heterogeneity and identify rare cell populations driving disease progression, 188 while functional proteomics screens systematically interrogate protein function and drug–target interactions. 189 Furthermore, integrating proteomic data with other ‐omics approaches, such as transcriptomics and metabolomics, remains essential for achieving a more comprehensive understanding of molecular pathways and regulatory networks driving DS‐AD. 6 METABOLOMICS 6.1 Metabolic alterations in AD and DS‐AD Metabolomics, a rapidly evolving field within systems biology, has become a potent tool for unraveling the complex molecular landscape associated with AD. 190 , 191 Lipidomic analyses of the AD brain reveal an enrichment of lysobisphosphatidic acid (LBPA), sphingomyelin, ganglioside GM3, and cholesterol esters, highlighting disruptions in neuronal membrane stability, signaling pathways, and lysosomal function. 192 Blood metabolomics in AD sheds light on intricate metabolic networks, particularly in lipid and amino acid metabolism, as well as pathways related to glucose and energy substrate use. 161 , 190 However, discrepancies exist among findings. Some studies have reported altered levels of glutamic acid, tyrosine, and other metabolites in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or plasma, while others found no significant changes. Similarly, sphingolipids and phosphatidylcholines often show differences between AD and control groups in plasma, yet other lipid markers demonstrate mixed results depending on the biofluid analyzed, along with variations in cohort characteristics and analytical methods used. 161 Nonetheless, this emerging field offers valuable insights into potential disease mechanisms and identifies promising therapeutic targets/opportunities. Moreover, the application of metabolomics holds significant promise in bridging the gap between preclinical research conducted in animal models of AD and its translation to human studies. Analysis of human post mortem brain tissue and CSF has revealed significantly altered energy homeostasis and metabolites in AD 193 , 194 ( supporting information ). Conversely, metabolic disorders, including mitochondrial defects, increased oxidative stress levels, and impaired glucose and lipid metabolism, ultimately result in reduced energy production and cellular dysfunctions, contributing significantly to the DS phenotype, including DS‐AD. 195 , 196 6.2 Metabolomics insights into DS‐AD Metabolomics provides valuable insights into the metabolic disruptions underlying DS‐AD, where T21 drives widespread alterations in lipid metabolism, amino acid pathways, and mitochondrial function. 195 , 196 These metabolic abnormalities are fundamental to both the DS phenotype and the increased risk of EOAD. Significant plasma metabolic disruptions in DS involve one‐carbon metabolism and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, both critical for energy production and neurotransmitter synthesis. 197 Plasma and urinary metabolomic profiles also consistently reflect mitochondrial dysfunction, linking DS to altered cellular energy homeostasis. 198 Dysregulation of metabolic pathways also involves amino acids like leucine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, and alanine. 199 Leucine contributes to neurotransmitter pathways via the glutamine/glycine system, while phenylalanine impacts dopamine synthesis, directly influencing cognitive processes. At the core of these metabolic disruptions are molecular mechanisms driven by T21, which exacerbate oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction. Overexpression of Chr21‐encoded genes such as superoxide dismutase 1 ( SOD1 ) and regulator of calcineurin 1 ( RCAN1 ) leads to elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) and lipid peroxidation, impairing mitochondrial integrity and functionality and exacerbating energy deficits. 200 These widespread physiological alterations in DS disrupt neuronal membranes, impair synaptic function, and contribute to Aβ aggregation. Dierssen et al. characterize DS as a metabolic disorder, emphasizing the central role of dysregulated insulin signaling in linking systemic metabolic alterations. 195 6.3 Perspective and limitations of metabolomics Some metabolomics studies have developed promising diagnostic models for the early detection and intervention of AD using panels of blood‐based metabolomic biomarkers. 161 Further study will help to confirm and reveal more specific changes of metabolism in DS‐AD, potentially leading to the development of a dynamic metabolomic score for assessing DS‐AD risk. Such a score could prove instrumental in clinical management by providing insights into the unique metabolic profile of individuals with DS and guiding potential metabolic interventions. Nutritional therapies aimed at correcting metabolic dysregulations, such as ketogenic diets or supplements targeting mitochondrial function, could offer new ways to support brain health and delay AD progression in DS. Furthermore, the identification of specific metabolic markers can lead to the development of metabolic therapies tailored to the unique needs of individuals with DS, potentially improving their quality of life and cognitive function. Despite its potential, variability in findings across metabolomics studies, driven by differences in cohort demographics, sample types, and analytical platforms, can hinder the reproducibility and generalizability of results. Moreover, the dynamic nature of the metabolome, influenced by factors such as age, diet, and comorbid conditions, complicates the interpretation of metabolic changes. Future research should prioritize longitudinal studies to capture temporal shifts in metabolism while using standardized protocols to reduce methodological variability. Integrating metabolomics with other ‐omics approaches, including transcriptomics and proteomics, will be essential for uncovering the complex interplay of metabolic and molecular networks in DS‐AD. 7 CONCLUDING REMARKS AND PERSPECTIVES DS and AD share overlapping molecular and metabolic pathways, encompassing alterations at the genetic, epigenetic, protein, and metabolite levels. Emerging strategies, such as immunotherapy targeting core AD pathology, 201 can be enhanced by integrating ‐omics approaches for precision medicine. In parallel, therapeutic strategies targeting specific DS‐associated genes and dysfunctions (e.g., APP overexpression due to T21, DYRK1A in the DSCR) could potentially delay or mitigate DS‐AD progression. The complexity of DS‐AD necessitates diverse research strategies and tailored interventions, with comprehensive insights from ‐omics studies (Table 5 ). For example, paradoxical alterations in BACE1 and PSEN1 expression within the DS brain challenge the anticipated correlation between increased enzyme activity and the progression of AD. Additionally, correlations between the AD PRS and proteins related to female infertility and autoimmune thyroiditis suggest potential links among reduced parity, autoimmune conditions, and heightened DS‐AD risk, pointing to novel intervention opportunities. However, further investigation of the mechanisms is warranted, considering alternative hypotheses such as hormonal dysregulation or immune system dysfunction, as well as the complexity of DS comorbidities. Metabolomics in AD provides insights into intricate metabolic networks and metabolic disorders that significantly contribute to the DS phenotype. In essence, these collective omics‐driven revelations furnish a comprehensive understanding, laying the foundation for targeted therapeutic interventions and precision clinical management in the challenging realm of neurodegenerative disorders. TABLE 5 Omics insights into the complex landscape of DS‐AD. Field Interconnections Key findings Genetics ‐ Epigenomics ‐ proteomics ‐ T21 drives AD Common genetic variants at the APP and ADAMTS1 loci on Chr21q21.3 are associated with increased susceptibility to AD. Rare variants in APP are associated with familial dominant form of AD. DS critical region: DYRK1A is associated with tau hyperphosphorylation; DYRK1A and DNMT3L contribute to epigenetic regulation. ‐ Genetic studies have identified common variants at multiple loci associated with AD across various chromosomes. ‐ Rare variants in PSEN1 and PSEN2 are associated with familial dominant forms of AD. ‐ The AD PRS is correlated with the blood levels of proteins implicated in conditions such as female infertility, autoimmune thyroiditis, and fetal growth retardation. Transcriptomics ‐ Genetics ‐ Genetics ‐ Genome‐wide transcriptomic changes impact oligodendrocyte development and myelination in developmental and adult DS brains. ‐ Genes in developmental and adult DS brains exhibit DEX, similarly found in oligodendrocytes, microglia, and astrocytes of AD brains. ‐ Familial AD genes PSEN1 and PSEN2 show reduced expression in adult DS brains, arguing against β‐ and γ‐secretase inhibitors for DS‐AD treatment. ‐ AD‐associated genes identified by GWASs demonstrate differential expression in developmental and adult DS brains, highlighting potential therapeutic targets. Epigenomics ‐ Transcriptomics ‐ Significant alterations in DNA methylation in the fetal DS cortex indicate accelerated epigenetic aging. ‐ Critical epigenetic genes located on Chr21, such as DYRK1A and DNMT3L , play roles in DS brain development and offer potential as therapeutic targets for gene‐specific epigenetic editing. ‐ Among the AD EWAS genes, 8 were identified with DEX in developmental and adult DS brain transcriptome. Proteomics ‐ Transcriptomics ‐ Transcriptomics ‐ Transcriptomics ‐ Proteome studies identify 2697 proteins differentially expressed in AD brains, associated with various neuropathologies and TREM2 overexpression implicating chronic inflammation. ‐ 105 proteins upregulated in AD brains are also upregulated in developmental and adult DS brain transcriptome. ‐ 101 proteins downregulated in AD brains are also downregulated in developmental and adult DS brain transcriptome. Metabolomics ‐ Altered blood metabolic profiles, along with disrupted energy homeostasis and metabolites in human post mortem brain tissue and CSF, are prominent in AD. ‐ Metabolic disorders, including mitochondrial defects, oxidative stress, and impaired glucose and lipid metabolism, are key contributors to the DS phenotype. ‐ A dynamic metabolomic score could be instrumental in shaping metabolic interventions for DS, such as ketogenic diets or supplements targeting mitochondrial function, supporting brain health and potentially delaying AD progression. Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer's disease; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DEX, differential expression; DS, Down syndrome; EWAS, epigenome‐wide association study; GWAS, genome‐wide association study; T21, trisomy 21. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. Developing innovative diagnostic tools and therapeutic strategies is essential to address the unique progression patterns of DS‐AD. In particular, cerebrovascular changes provide important insights into disease progression. In DS adults, cortical microinfarcts are common with age and in those more affected by AD. 202 Meanwhile, cerebral microbleeds have been detected in a subset of DS children as early as age 5 years, and these individuals may be at the highest risk of developing DS‐AD earlier and progress more rapidly. 203 Meanwhile, the advent of emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI)–driven analysis for the comprehensive integration of multi‐omics data, 204 advanced imaging techniques for the early detection of AD pathology, and CRISPR‐Cas9 for precise gene editing, heralds a new era in understanding and managing DS‐AD. These advancements promise to catalyze breakthroughs in early diagnosis, targeted therapy development, and personalized treatment approaches. To effectively identify specific therapeutic targets for DS‐AD, the strategies involve gathering comprehensive multi‐omics data from large and diverse patient cohorts, integrating clinical data such as patient history and treatment response, and using improved AI models to manage data imbalance and noise while enhancing interpretability through algorithm development and feature importance scoring. Guidelines should be formulated by emphasizing cross‐disciplinary collaboration among geneticists, bioinformaticians, and clinicians, establishing standardized protocols for generating and sharing multi‐omics data, and prioritizing experimental validation using in vitro and in vivo models. In vitro models, such as cell cultures and organoids derived from patient‐derived iPSCs, 205 offer a controlled environment for studying molecular pathways and screening potential therapeutic interventions. These models can recapitulate key aspects of DS‐AD pathology, allowing for the investigation of molecular mechanisms and the evaluation of candidate targets in a controlled setting. In vivo models, including transgenic mouse models and non‐human primates, provide valuable insights into disease pathogenesis and therapeutic efficacy in a more complex biological context. 206 , 207 These models enable researchers to study disease progression, test the effects of candidate interventions, and assess safety and efficacy parameters. Building on these models, we may leverage single‐cell multi‐omics technologies and spatial profiling techniques, such as using scRNAseq to capture dynamic molecular changes across disease progression stages and tissue microenvironments, using long‐read sequencing for higher resolution gene isoform analysis, 208 and integrating multi‐omics data for patient stratification and precision medicine applications. In our quest for scientific advancement, it is paramount to center our efforts on improving the quality of life for individuals with DS. While obtaining a comprehensive understanding of DS‐AD may take time, a focused exploration of specific mechanisms may offer a targeted approach that could yield therapeutic effects. In this regard, the utility of specific omics‐derived biomarkers that would identify DS patients who are at greatest risk of developing early and more severe dementia would be of high value. It is highly likely that children who present with microbleeds on magnetic resonance imaging in early childhood are the primary risk group for this who may then warrant preventive therapy with safe and effective drugs that block the aggregation and precipitation of amyloid and tau proteins in the brain. 209 Looking ahead, longitudinal studies will play a critical role in tracking AD progression in DS individuals from an early age into adulthood, helping to identify pivotal intervention points that could significantly influence disease trajectory and improve patient outcomes. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Author disclosures are available in the supporting information . Supporting information Supporting information Supporting information ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors sincerely thank the two anonymous reviewers for their insightful and constructive feedback, which greatly enhanced the quality of this study. The authors are supported by the Gabriella Miller Kids First Pediatric Research Program consortium (Kids First) funded by the Common Fund of the Office of the Director of the National Institutes of Health ( www.commonfund.nih.gov/KidsFirst ), the International Hundred Thousand Plus Cohort Consortium (IHCC), Institutional Development Funds from The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia to the Center for Applied Genomics, the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Endowed Chair in Genomic Research to HH, and a donation to CAG from the Neff Family Foundation. REFERENCES 1 Dunn P . Dr Langdon Down (1828‐1896) and 'mongolism' . Arch Dis Child . 1991 ; 66 : 827 . 1830736 10.1136/adc.66.7_spec_no.827 PMC1590233 2 Antonarakis SE , Skotko BG , Rafii MS , et al. Down syndrome . Nat Rev Dis Primers . 2020 ; 6 : 9 . 32029743 10.1038/s41572-019-0143-7 PMC8428796 3 Presson AP , Partyka G , Jensen KM , et al. Current estimate of Down syndrome population prevalence in the United States . J Pediatr . 2013 ; 163 : 1163 ‐ 1168 . 23885965 10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.06.013 PMC4445685 4 Mutton D , Alberman E , Hook E . Cytogenetic and epidemiological findings in Down syndrome, England and Wales 1989 to 1993. National Down Syndrome Cytogenetic Register and the Association of Clinical Cytogeneticists . J Med Genet . 1996 ; 33 : 387 ‐ 394 . 8733049 10.1136/jmg.33.5.387 PMC1050608 5 Dreux S , Olivier C , Dupont JM , et al. Maternal serum screening in cases of mosaic and translocation Down syndrome . Prenat Diagn . 2008 ; 28 : 699 ‐ 703 . 18615544 10.1002/pd.2051 6 Arumugam A , Raja K , Venugopalan M , et al. Down syndrome—a narrative review with a focus on anatomical features . Clin Anat . 2016 ; 29 : 568 ‐ 577 . 26599319 10.1002/ca.22672 7 Hodapp RM , Burke MM , Finley CI , Urbano RC . Family caregiving of aging adults with Down syndrome . J Policy Pract Intellect Disabil . 2016 ; 13 : 181 ‐ 189 . 8 Zigman W , Silverman W , Wisniewski HM . Aging and Alzheimer's disease in Down syndrome: clinical and pathological changes . Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev . 1996 ; 2 : 73 ‐ 79 . 9 Zigman WB , Lott IT . Alzheimer's disease in Down syndrome: neurobiology and risk . Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev . 2007 ; 13 : 237 ‐ 246 . 17910085 10.1002/mrdd.20163 10 Fortea J , Zaman SH , Hartley S , Rafii MS , Head E , Carmona‐Iragui M . Alzheimer's disease associated with Down syndrome: a genetic form of dementia . Lancet Neurol . 2021 ; 20 : 930 ‐ 942 . 34687637 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00245-3 PMC9387748 11 Desai AK , Grossberg GT . Diagnosis and treatment of Alzheimer's disease . Neurology . 2005 ; 64 : S34 . 15994222 10.1212/wnl.64.12_suppl_3.s34 12 Huang Y , Mahley RW . Apolipoprotein E: structure and function in lipid metabolism, neurobiology, and Alzheimer's diseases . Neurobiol Dis . 2014 ; 72 : 3 ‐ 12 . 25173806 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.08.025 PMC4253862 13 Ashrafian H , Zadeh EH , Khan RH . Review on Alzheimer's disease: inhibition of amyloid beta and tau tangle formation . Int J Biol Macromol . 2021 ; 167 : 382 ‐ 394 . 33278431 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.11.192 14 Arnsten AFT , Datta D , Del Tredici K , Braak H . Hypothesis: tau pathology is an initiating factor in sporadic Alzheimer's disease . Alzheimers Dement . 2021 ; 17 : 115 ‐ 124 . 33075193 10.1002/alz.12192 PMC7983919 15 Braak H , Del Tredici K . Neuroanatomy and pathology of sporadic Alzheimer's disease . Springer Cham; 2015 . doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-12679-1 25920101 16 Pluta R , Ułamek‐Kozioł M . Tau protein‐targeted therapies in Alzheimer's disease: current state and future perspectives . Exon Publications . 2020 : 69 ‐ 82 . 17 Nelson PT , Alafuzoff I , Bigio EH , et al. Correlation of Alzheimer disease neuropathologic changes with cognitive status: a review of the literature . J Neuropathol Exp Neurol . 2012 ; 71 : 362 ‐ 381 . 22487856 10.1097/NEN.0b013e31825018f7 PMC3560290 18 Vogel JW , Iturria‐Medina Y , Strandberg OT , et al. Spread of pathological tau proteins through communicating neurons in human Alzheimer's disease . Nat Commun . 2020 ; 11 : 2612 . 32457389 10.1038/s41467-020-15701-2 PMC7251068 19 Hartley SL , Handen BL , Tudorascu D , et al. Role of tau deposition in early cognitive decline in Down syndrome . Alzheimers Dement . 2022 ; 14 : e12256 . 10.1002/dad2.12256 PMC8976157 35386473 20 Flores‐Aguilar L , Iulita MF , Kovecses O , et al. Evolution of neuroinflammation across the lifespan of individuals with Down syndrome . Brain: a journal of neurology . 2020 ; 143 : 3653 ‐ 3671 . 33206953 10.1093/brain/awaa326 PMC7805813 21 Grøntvedt GR , Lauridsen C , Berge G , et al. The amyloid, tau, and neurodegeneration (A/T/N) classification applied to a clinical research cohort with long‐term follow‐up . J Alzheimers Dis . 2020 ; 74 : 829 ‐ 837 . 32116257 10.3233/JAD-191227 PMC7242836 22 Eng LF , Ghirnikar RS . GFAP and astrogliosis. Brain pathology . Brain Pathol . 1994 ; 4 ( 3 ): 229 ‐ 237 . 7952264 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1994.tb00838.x 23 Graham NS , Zimmerman KA , Moro F , et al. Axonal marker neurofilament light predicts long‐term outcomes and progressive neurodegeneration after traumatic brain injury . Sci Transl Med . 2021 ; 13 : eabg9922 . 34586833 10.1126/scitranslmed.abg9922 24 Chatterjee P , Pedrini S , Doecke JD , et al. Plasma Aβ42/40 ratio, p‐tau181, GFAP, and NfL across the Alzheimer's disease continuum: a cross‐sectional and longitudinal study in the AIBL cohort . Alzheimers Dement . 2023 ; 19 : 1117 ‐ 1134 . 36574591 10.1002/alz.12724 25 Ashleigh T , Swerdlow RH , Beal MF . The role of mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis . Alzheimers Dement . 2023 ; 19 : 333 ‐ 342 . 35522844 10.1002/alz.12683 26 Plascencia‐Villa G , Perry G . Roles of oxidative stress in synaptic dysfunction and neuronal cell death in Alzheimer's disease . Antioxidants . 2023 ; 12 : 1628 . 37627623 10.3390/antiox12081628 PMC10451948 27 Xu L‐Z , Li B‐Q , Li F‐Y , et al. NMDA receptor GluN2B subunit is involved in excitotoxicity mediated by death‐associated protein kinase 1 in Alzheimer's disease . J Alzheimers Dis . 2023 ; 91 ( 2 ): 877 ‐ 893 . 36502323 10.3233/JAD-220747 28 Thakur S , Dhapola R , Sarma P , Medhi B , Reddy DH . Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's disease: current progress in molecular signaling and therapeutics . Inflammation . 2023 ; 46 : 1 ‐ 17 . 35986874 10.1007/s10753-022-01721-1 29 Martinez JL , Zammit MD , West NR , Christian BT , Bhattacharyya A . Basal forebrain cholinergic neurons: linking down syndrome and Alzheimer's disease . Front Aging Neurosci . 2021 ; 13 : 703876 . 34322015 10.3389/fnagi.2021.703876 PMC8311593 30 Martini AC , Gross TJ , Head E , Mapstone M . Beyond amyloid: immune, cerebrovascular, and metabolic contributions to Alzheimer disease in people with Down syndrome . Neuron . 2022 . 10.1016/j.neuron.2022.04.001 PMC9262826 35472307 31 Prasher V , Chowdhury T , Rowe B , Bain S . ApoE genotype and Alzheimer's disease in adults with Down syndrome: meta‐analysis . A J Ment Retardat . 1997 ; 102 : 103 ‐ 110 . 10.1352/0895-8017(1997)102&lt;0103:AGAADI&gt;2.0.CO;2 9327086 32 Deb S , Braganza J , Norton N , et al. APOE ε4 influences the manifestation of Alzheimer's disease in adults with Down's syndrome . Br J Psychiatry . 2000 ; 176 : 468 ‐ 472 . 10912224 10.1192/bjp.176.5.468 33 Sherrington R , Rogaev EI , Liang Y , et al. Cloning of a gene bearing missense mutations in early‐onset familial Alzheimer's disease . Nature . 1995 ; 375 : 754 ‐ 760 . 7596406 10.1038/375754a0 34 Ryan NS , Nicholas JM , Weston PS , et al. Clinical phenotype and genetic associations in autosomal dominant familial Alzheimer's disease: a case series . Lancet Neurol . 2016 ; 15 : 1326 ‐ 1335 . 27777022 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30193-4 35 Lanoiselée H‐M , Nicolas G , Wallon D , et al. APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2 mutations in early‐onset Alzheimer disease: a genetic screening study of familial and sporadic cases . PLoS Med . 2017 ; 14 : e1002270 . 28350801 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002270 PMC5370101 36 Olmos‐Serrano JL , Kang HJ , Tyler WA , et al. Down syndrome developmental brain transcriptome reveals defective oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination . Neuron . 2016 ; 89 : 1208 ‐ 1222 . 26924435 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.01.042 PMC4795969 37 Lockstone H , Harris L , Swatton J , Wayland M , Holland A , Bahn S . Gene expression profiling in the adult Down syndrome brain . Genomics . 2007 ; 90 : 647 ‐ 660 . 17950572 10.1016/j.ygeno.2007.08.005 38 Prasher V , Farrer MJ , Kessling AM , et al. Molecular mapping of Alzheimer‐type dementia in Down's syndrome . Ann Neurol . 1998 ; 43 : 380 ‐ 383 . 9506555 10.1002/ana.410430316 39 Papavassiliou P , Charalsawadi C , Rafferty K , Jackson‐Cook C . Mosaicism for trisomy 21: a review . Am J Med Genet Part A . 2015 ; 167 : 26 ‐ 39 . 10.1002/ajmg.a.36861 25412855 40 Potter H , Granic A , Caneus J . Role of trisomy 21 mosaicism in sporadic and familial Alzheimer's disease . Curr Alzheimer Res . 2016 ; 13 : 7 ‐ 17 . 26651340 10.2174/156720501301151207100616 PMC5570437 41 Nuebling GS , Prix C , Brendel M , et al. Low‐degree trisomy 21 mosaicism promotes early‐onset Alzheimer disease . Neurobiol Aging . 2021 ; 103 : 147.e1 ‐ 147.e5 .. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.02.021 33789815 42 Head E , Helman AM , Powell D , Schmitt FA . Down syndrome, beta‐amyloid and neuroimaging . Free Radical Biol Med . 2018 ; 114 : 102 ‐ 109 . 28935420 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.09.013 PMC5748259 43 Cheon M , Dierssen M , Kim S , Lubec G . Protein expression of BACE1, BACE2 and APP in Down syndrome brains . Amino Acids . 2008 ; 35 : 339 ‐ 343 . 18163181 10.1007/s00726-007-0618-9 44 Dimitrov M , Alattia J‐R , Lemmin T , et al. Alzheimer's disease mutations in APP but not γ‐secretase modulators affect epsilon‐cleavage‐dependent AICD production . Nat Commun . 2013 ; 4 : 2246 . 23907250 10.1038/ncomms3246 45 Zhou L , Brouwers N , Benilova I , et al. Amyloid precursor protein mutation E682K at the alternative β‐secretase cleavage β′‐site increases Aβ generation . EMBO Mol Med . 2011 ; 3 : 291 ‐ 302 . 21500352 10.1002/emmm.201100138 PMC3377078 46 Pinheiro L , Faustino C . Therapeutic strategies targeting amyloid‐β in Alzheimer's disease . Curr Alzheimer Res . 2019 ; 16 : 418 ‐ 452 . 30907320 10.2174/1567205016666190321163438 47 Hung C , Fertan E , Livesey FJ , Klenerman D , Patani R . APP antisense oligonucleotides reduce Aβ aggregation and rescue endolysosomal dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease . Brain: a journal of neurology . 2024 ; 147 ( 7 ): 2325 ‐ 2333 . 38527856 10.1093/brain/awae092 PMC11224613 48 Grabowska‐Pyrzewicz W , Want A , Leszek J , Wojda U . Antisense oligonucleotides for Alzheimer's disease therapy: from the mRNA to miRNA paradigm . EBioMed . 2021 ; 74 : 103691 . 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103691 PMC8602003 34773891 49 Lu L , Yu X , Cai Y , Sun M , Yang H . Application of CRISPR/Cas9 in alzheimer's disease . Front Neurosci . 2021 ; 15 : 803894 . 34992519 10.3389/fnins.2021.803894 PMC8724030 50 van Bon BW , Hoischen A , Hehir‐Kwa J , et al. Intragenic deletion in DYRK1A leads to mental retardation and primary microcephaly . Clin Genet . 2011 ; 79 : 296 ‐ 299 . 21294719 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01544.x 51 Arbones ML , Thomazeau A , Nakano‐Kobayashi A , Hagiwara M , Delabar JM . DYRK1A and cognition: a lifelong relationship . Pharmacol Ther . 2019 ; 194 : 199 ‐ 221 . 30268771 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2018.09.010 52 Jiang X , Liu C , Yu T , et al. Genetic dissection of the Down syndrome critical region . Hum Mol Genet . 2015 ; 24 : 6540 ‐ 6551 . 26374847 10.1093/hmg/ddv364 PMC4614710 53 Wegiel J , Gong CX , Hwang YW . The role of DYRK1A in neurodegenerative diseases . FEBS J . 2011 ; 278 : 236 ‐ 245 . 21156028 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07955.x PMC3052627 54 Wisch JK , McKay NS , Boerwinkle AH , et al. Comparison of tau spread in people with Down syndrome versus autosomal‐dominant Alzheimer's disease: a cross‐sectional study . Lancet Neurol . 2024 ; 23 : 500 ‐ 510 . 38631766 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00084-X PMC11209765 55 Lan C , Chen C , Qu S , et al. Inhibition of DYRK1A, via histone modification, promotes cardiomyocyte cell cycle activation and cardiac repair after myocardial infarction . EBioMedicine . 2022 ; 82 : 104139 . 35810562 10.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104139 PMC9278077 56 Soppa U , Becker W . DYRK protein kinases . Curr Biol . 2015 ; 25 : R488 ‐ R9 . 26079075 10.1016/j.cub.2015.02.067 57 Ooi SK , Qiu C , Bernstein E , et al. DNMT3L connects unmethylated lysine 4 of histone H3 to de novo methylation of DNA . Nature . 2007 ; 448 : 714 ‐ 717 . 17687327 10.1038/nature05987 PMC2650820 58 Suetake I , Shinozaki F , Miyagawa J , Takeshima H , Tajima S . DNMT3L stimulates the DNA methylation activity of Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b through a direct interaction . J Biol Chem . 2004 ; 279 : 27816 ‐ 27823 . 15105426 10.1074/jbc.M400181200 59 Laufer BI , Gomez JA , Jianu JM , LaSalle JM . Stable DNMT3L overexpression in SH‐SY5Y neurons recreates a facet of the genome‐wide Down syndrome DNA methylation signature . Epigenetics Chromatin . 2021 ; 14 : 1 ‐ 15 . 33750431 10.1186/s13072-021-00387-7 PMC7942011 60 Mentis A . Epigenomic engineering for Down syndrome . Neurosci Biobehav Rev . 2016 ; 71 : 323 ‐ 327 . 27646312 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.09.012 61 Roses AD , Saunders AM . APOE is a major susceptibility gene for Alzheimer's disease . Curr Opin Biotechnol . 1994 ; 5 : 663 ‐ 667 . 7765750 10.1016/0958-1669(94)90091-4 62 D'Souza H , Mason L , Mok KY , et al. Differential associations of apolipoprotein E ε4 genotype with attentional abilities across the life span of individuals with Down syndrome . JAMA Netw Open . 2020 ; 3 : e2018221 . 32986108 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.18221 PMC7522696 63 Bejanin A , Iulita MF , Vilaplana E , et al. Association of apolipoprotein E ɛ4 allele with clinical and multimodal biomarker changes of Alzheimer disease in adults with Down syndrome . JAMA Neurol . 2021 ; 78 : 937 ‐ 947 . 34228042 10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.1893 PMC8261691 64 Jun GR , Chung J , Mez J , et al. Transethnic genome‐wide scan identifies novel Alzheimer's disease loci . Alzheimers Dement . 2017 ; 13 : 727 ‐ 738 . 28183528 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.12.012 PMC5496797 65 Bellenguez C , Küçükali F , Jansen IE , et al. New insights into the genetic etiology of Alzheimer's disease and related dementias . Nat Genet . 2022 ; 54 : 412 ‐ 436 . 35379992 10.1038/s41588-022-01024-z PMC9005347 66 Jones EL , Mok K , Hanney M , et al. Evidence that PICALM affects age at onset of Alzheimer's dementia in Down syndrome . Neurobiol Aging . 2013 ; 34 . 2441.e1‐2441.e24415. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.03.018 PMC3898582 23601808 67 Willy NM , Colombo F , Huber S , et al. CALM supports clathrin‐coated vesicle completion upon membrane tension increase . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2021 ; 118 ( 25 ): e2010438118 . 34155137 10.1073/pnas.2010438118 PMC8237669 68 Zhao Z , Sagare AP , Ma Q , et al. Central role for PICALM in amyloid‐β blood‐brain barrier transcytosis and clearance . Nat Neurosci . 2015 ; 18 : 978 ‐ 987 . 26005850 10.1038/nn.4025 PMC4482781 69 De Rojas I , Moreno‐Grau S , Tesi N , et al. Common variants in Alzheimer's disease and risk stratification by polygenic risk scores . Nat Commun . 2021 ; 12 : 3417 . 34099642 10.1038/s41467-021-22491-8 PMC8184987 70 Gorijala P , Aslam MM , Dang LHT , et al. Alzheimer's polygenic risk scores are associated with cognitive phenotypes in Down syndrome . Alzheimers Dement . 2023 ; 20 ( 2 ): 1038 ‐ 1049 . 37855447 10.1002/alz.13506 PMC10916941 71 Bae JB , Lipnicki DM , Han JW , et al. Does parity matter in women's risk of dementia? A COSMIC collaboration cohort study . BMC medicine . 2020 ; 18 : 1 ‐ 11 . 32753059 10.1186/s12916-020-01671-1 PMC7406389 72 Sleiman PM , Qu HQ , Connolly JJ , et al. Trans‐ethnic genomic informed risk assessment for Alzheimer's disease: an International Hundred K+ Cohorts Consortium study . Alzheimers Dement . 2023 ; 19 ( 12 ): 5765 ‐ 5772 . 37450379 10.1002/alz.13378 PMC10854406 73 Hodapp RM , Ly TM , Fidler DJ , Ricci LA . Less stress, more rewarding: parenting children with Down syndrome . Parent Sci Pract . 2001 ; 1 : 317 ‐ 337 . 74 Lan Y‐L , Zhao J , Li S . Update on the neuroprotective effect of estrogen receptor alpha against Alzheimer's disease . J Alzheimers Dis . 2015 ; 43 : 1137 ‐ 1148 . 25159676 10.3233/JAD-141875 75 Ko C‐Y , Chang W‐C , Wang J‐M . Biological roles of CCAAT/Enhancer‐binding protein delta during inflammation . J Biomed Sci . 2015 ; 22 : 1 ‐ 8 . 25591788 10.1186/s12929-014-0110-2 PMC4318212 76 Liu J , Yuan S , Niu X , Kelleher R , Sheridan H . ESR1 dysfunction triggers neuroinflammation as a critical upstream causative factor of the Alzheimer's disease process . Aging . 2022 ; 14 : 8595 ‐ 8614 . 36326669 10.18632/aging.204359 PMC9699767 77 Brown P , McNeilly AS . Transcriptional regulation of pituitary gonadotrophin subunit genes . Rev Reprod . 1999 ; 4 : 117 ‐ 124 . 10357099 10.1530/ror.0.0040117 78 Dall GV , Britt KL . Estrogen effects on the mammary gland in early and late life and breast cancer risk . Front Oncol . 2017 ; 7 : 110 . 28603694 10.3389/fonc.2017.00110 PMC5445118 79 Folch J , Pedros I , Patraca I , et al. Neuroprotective and anti‐ageing role of leptin . J Mol Endocrinol . 2012 ; 49 : R149 ‐ R56 . 22967480 10.1530/JME-12-0151 80 Irving AJ , Harvey J . Leptin regulation of hippocampal synaptic function in health and disease . Philos Trans R Soc B, Biol Sci . 2014 ; 369 : 20130155 . 10.1098/rstb.2013.0155 PMC3843886 24298156 81 Aversa T , Lombardo F , Valenzise M , et al. Peculiarities of autoimmune thyroid diseases in children with Turner or Down syndrome: an overview . Ital J Pediatr . 2015 ; 41 : 1 ‐ 5 . 25971674 10.1186/s13052-015-0146-2 PMC4440559 82 Arnaiz‐Villena A , Perez‐Aciego P , Ballestin C , et al. Biochemical basis of a novel T lymphocyte receptor immunodeficiency by immunohistochemistry. A possible CD3 gamma abnormality . Lab Invest . 1991 ; 64 : 675 ‐ 681 . 1709425 83 Sarapura VD , Strouth HL , Gordon DF , Wood WM , Ridgway EC . Msx1 is present in thyrotropic cells and binds to a consensus site on the glycoprotein hormone alpha‐subunit promoter . Mol Endocrinol . 1997 ; 11 : 1782 ‐ 1794 . 9369446 10.1210/mend.11.12.0015 84 Morris JK , Cole TJ , Springett AL , Dennis J . Down syndrome birth weight in England and Wales: implications for clinical practice . Am J Med Genet A . 2015 ; 167a : 3070 ‐ 3075 . 26407756 10.1002/ajmg.a.37366 PMC4950055 85 Cízková A , Stránecký V , Mayr JA , et al. TMEM70 mutations cause isolated ATP synthase deficiency and neonatal mitochondrial encephalocardiomyopathy . Nat Genet . 2008 ; 40 : 1288 ‐ 1290 . 18953340 10.1038/ng.246 86 Tio ES , Hohman TJ , Milic M , Bennett DA , Felsky D . Testing a polygenic risk score for morphological microglial activation in Alzheimer's disease and aging . J Alzheimers Dis . 2023 ; 94 ( 4 ): 1549 ‐ 1561 . 37458040 10.3233/JAD-230434 PMC11062501 87 Schork NJ , Elman JA . Pathway‐specific polygenic risk scores correlate with clinical status and Alzheimer's disease‐related biomarkers . J Alzheimers Dis . 2023 ; 95 ( 3 ): 915 ‐ 929 . 37661888 10.3233/JAD-230548 PMC10697039 88 Baker E , Escott‐Price V . Polygenic risk scores in Alzheimer's disease: current applications and future directions . Front Digit Health . 2020 ; 2 : 14 . 34713027 10.3389/fdgth.2020.00014 PMC8521998 89 Lo M‐T , Kauppi K , Fan C‐C , et al. Identification of genetic heterogeneity of Alzheimer's disease across age . Neurobiol Aging . 2019 ; 84 : 243.e1 ‐ 243.e9 . 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.02.022 PMC6783343 30979435 90 Sims R , Hill M , Williams J . The multiplex model of the genetics of Alzheimer's disease . Nat Neurosci . 2020 ; 23 : 311 ‐ 322 . 32112059 10.1038/s41593-020-0599-5 91 Ahmed MM , Johnson NR , Boyd TD , Coughlan C , Chial HJ , Potter H . Innate immune system activation and neuroinflammation in Down syndrome and neurodegeneration: therapeutic targets or partners? . Front Aging Neurosci . 2021 ; 13 : 718426 . 34603007 10.3389/fnagi.2021.718426 PMC8481947 92 Mathys H , Peng Z , Boix CA , et al. Single‐cell atlas reveals correlates of high cognitive function, dementia, and resilience to Alzheimer's disease pathology . Cell . 2023 ; 186 : 4365 ‐ 4385.e27 . 37774677 10.1016/j.cell.2023.08.039 PMC10601493 93 Tan MG , Lee C , Lee JH , et al. Decreased rabphilin 3A immunoreactivity in Alzheimer's disease is associated with Aβ burden . Neurochem Int . 2014 ; 64 : 29 ‐ 36 . 24200817 10.1016/j.neuint.2013.10.013 94 Zuccato C , Ciammola A , Rigamonti D , et al. Loss of huntingtin‐mediated BDNF gene transcription in Huntington's disease . Science . 2001 ; 293 : 493 ‐ 498 . 11408619 10.1126/science.1059581 95 Xu D , Hopf C , Reddy R , et al. Narp and NP1 form heterocomplexes that function in developmental and activity‐dependent synaptic plasticity . Neuron . 2003 ; 39 : 513 ‐ 528 . 12895424 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00463-x 96 Wilcock DM , Schmitt FA , Head E . Cerebrovascular contributions to aging and Alzheimer's disease in Down syndrome . BBA‐Mol Basis Dis . 2016 ; 1862 : 909 ‐ 914 . 10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.11.007 PMC4821721 26593849 97 Privratsky JR , Paddock CM , Florey O , Newman DK , Muller WA , Newman PJ . Relative contribution of PECAM‐1 adhesion and signaling to the maintenance of vascular integrity . J Cell Sci . 2011 ; 124 : 1477 ‐ 1485 . 21486942 10.1242/jcs.082271 PMC3078814 98 Shalek AK , Satija R , Shuga J , et al. Single‐cell RNA‐seq reveals dynamic paracrine control of cellular variation . Nature . 2014 ; 510 : 363 ‐ 369 . 24919153 10.1038/nature13437 PMC4193940 99 Wu H , Kirita Y , Donnelly EL , Humphreys BD . Advantages of single‐nucleus over single‐cell RNA sequencing of adult kidney: rare cell types and novel cell states revealed in fibrosis . J Am Soc Nephrol . 2019 ; 30 : 23 ‐ 32 . 30510133 10.1681/ASN.2018090912 PMC6317600 100 Qu H‐Q , Kao C , Hakonarson H . Single‐cell RNA sequencing technology landscape in 2023 . Stem Cells . 2024 ; 42 : 1 ‐ 12 . 37934608 10.1093/stmcls/sxad077 101 Morabito S , Miyoshi E , Michael N , et al. Single‐nucleus chromatin accessibility and transcriptomic characterization of Alzheimer's disease . Nat Genet . 2021 ; 53 : 1143 ‐ 1155 . 34239132 10.1038/s41588-021-00894-z PMC8766217 102 Chen H , Boutros PC . VennDiagram: a package for the generation of highly‐customizable Venn and Euler diagrams in R . BMC Bioinf . 2011 ; 12 : 1 ‐ 7 . 10.1186/1471-2105-12-35 PMC3041657 21269502 103 Butt AM , De La , Rocha IC , Rivera A . Oligodendroglial cells in Alzheimer's disease . Neuroglia Neurodegener Dis . 2019 : 325 ‐ 333 . 10.1007/978-981-13-9913-8_12 31583593 104 Preman P , Alfonso‐Triguero M , Alberdi E , Verkhratsky A , Arranz AM . Astrocytes in Alzheimer's disease: pathological significance and molecular pathways . Cells . 2021 ; 10 : 540 . 33806259 10.3390/cells10030540 PMC7999452 105 Lewcock JW , Schlepckow K , Di Paolo G , Tahirovic S , Monroe KM , Haass C . Emerging microglia biology defines novel therapeutic approaches for Alzheimer's disease . Neuron . 2020 ; 108 : 801 ‐ 821 . 33096024 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.09.029 106 Huang Z , Wong L‐W , Su Y , et al. Blood‐brain barrier integrity in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease . Front Neuroendocrinol . 2020 ; 59 : 100857 . 32781194 10.1016/j.yfrne.2020.100857 107 Kagan BL , Hirakura Y , Azimov R , Azimova R , Lin M‐C . The channel hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease: current status . Peptides . 2002 ; 23 : 1311 ‐ 1315 . 12128087 10.1016/s0196-9781(02)00067-0 108 Wang J , Duncan D , Shi Z , Zhang B . WEB‐based gene set analysis toolkit (WebGestalt): update 2013 . Nucleic Acids Res . 2013 ; 41 : W77 ‐ W83 . 23703215 10.1093/nar/gkt439 PMC3692109 109 Kelley WM , Miezin FM , McDermott KB , et al. Hemispheric specialization in human dorsal frontal cortex and medial temporal lobe for verbal and nonverbal memory encoding . Neuron . 1998 ; 20 : 927 ‐ 936 . 9620697 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80474-2 110 Vassar R , Bennett BD , Babu‐Khan S , et al. Beta‐secretase cleavage of Alzheimer's amyloid precursor protein by the transmembrane aspartic protease BACE . Science . 1999 ; 286 : 735 ‐ 741 . 10531052 10.1126/science.286.5440.735 111 Moussa‐Pacha NM , Abdin SM , Omar HA , Alniss H , Al‐Tel TH . BACE1 inhibitors: current status and future directions in treating Alzheimer's disease . Med Res Rev . 2020 ; 40 : 339 ‐ 384 . 31347728 10.1002/med.21622 112 Jacobs HI , Hopkins DA , Mayrhofer HC , et al. The cerebellum in Alzheimer's disease: evaluating its role in cognitive decline . Brain: a journal of neurology . 2018 ; 141 : 37 ‐ 47 . 29053771 10.1093/brain/awx194 113 Mochizuki H , Yoshida K , Gotoh M , et al. Characterization of a heparan sulfate 3‐O‐sulfotransferase‐5, an enzyme synthesizing a tetrasulfated disaccharide . J Biol Chem . 2003 ; 278 : 26780 ‐ 26787 . 12740361 10.1074/jbc.M301861200 114 Ozsan McMillan I , Li J‐P , Wang L . Heparan sulfate proteoglycan in Alzheimer's disease: aberrant expression and functions in molecular pathways related to amyloid‐β metabolism . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol . 2023 ; 324 : C893 ‐ C909 . 36878848 10.1152/ajpcell.00247.2022 PMC10069967 115 Zhu Y , Gandy L , Zhang F , et al. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans in tauopathy . Biomolecules . 2022 ; 12 : 1792 . 36551220 10.3390/biom12121792 PMC9776397 116 Bateman A , Bennett H . Granulins: the structure and function of an emerging family of growth factors . J Endocrinol . 1998 ; 158 : 145 ‐ 151 . 9771457 10.1677/joe.0.1580145 117 Zhu J , Nathan C , Jin W , et al. Conversion of proepithelin to epithelins: roles of SLPI and elastase in host defense and wound repair . Cell . 2002 ; 111 : 867 ‐ 878 . 12526812 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)01141-8 118 Cruts M , Gijselinck I , van der Zee J , et al. Null mutations in progranulin cause ubiquitin‐positive frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17q21 . Nature . 2006 ; 442 : 920 ‐ 924 . 16862115 10.1038/nature05017 119 Brouwers N , Nuytemans K , van der Zee J , et al. Alzheimer and Parkinson diagnoses in progranulin null mutation carriers in an extended founder family . Arch Neurol . 2007 ; 64 : 1436 ‐ 1446 . 17923627 10.1001/archneur.64.10.1436 120 Reho P , Koga S , Shah Z , et al. GRN mutations are associated with Lewy body dementia . Movement Disord . 2022 : 1943 ‐ 1948 . doi: 10.1002/mds.29144 10.1002/mds.29144 PMC9474656 35810449 121 Wang S , Weyer M‐P , Hummel R , Wilken‐Schmitz A , Tegeder I , Schäfer MK . Selective neuronal expression of progranulin is sufficient to provide neuroprotective and anti‐inflammatory effects after traumatic brain injury . J Neuroinflam . 2024 ; 21 : 257 . 10.1186/s12974-024-03249-7 PMC11468377 39390556 122 Dowler S , Currie RA , Campbell DG , et al. Identification of pleckstrin‐homology‐domain‐containing proteins with novel phosphoinositide‐binding specificities . Biochem J . 2000 ; 351 : 19 ‐ 31 . 11001876 10.1042/0264-6021:3510019 PMC1221362 123 Lenz M , Eichler A , Kruse P , et al. The amyloid precursor protein regulates synaptic transmission at medial perforant path synapses . J Neurosci . 2023 ; 43 : 5290 ‐ 5304 . 37369586 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1824-22.2023 PMC10359033 124 Mathieu S , Briend M , Abner E , et al. Genetic association and Mendelian randomization for hypothyroidism highlight immune molecular mechanisms . iScience . 2022 ; 25 : 104992 . 36093044 10.1016/j.isci.2022.104992 PMC9460554 125 Saevarsdottir S , Olafsdottir TA , Ivarsdottir EV , et al. FLT3 stop mutation increases FLT3 ligand level and risk of autoimmune thyroid disease . Nature . 2020 ; 584 : 619 ‐ 623 . 32581359 10.1038/s41586-020-2436-0 126 Kichaev G , Bhatia G , Loh PR , et al. Leveraging polygenic functional enrichment to improve GWAS power . Am J Hum Genet . 2019 ; 104 : 65 ‐ 75 . 30595370 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.11.008 PMC6323418 127 Gradtke AC , Mentrup T , Lehmann CHK , et al. Deficiency of the intramembrane protease SPPL2a alters antimycobacterial cytokine responses of dendritic cells . J Immunol . 2021 ; 206 : 164 ‐ 180 . 33239420 10.4049/jimmunol.2000151 128 Maccioni R , Travisan C , Zerial S , et al. Signal peptide peptidase‐Like 2b affects APP cleavage and exhibits a biphasic Aβ‐mediated expression in Alzheimer′ s disease . Biorxiv . 2022 . 10.24.513473. 129 Tu Y , Wu S , Shi X , Chen K , Wu C . Migfilin and Mig‐2 link focal adhesions to filamin and the actin cytoskeleton and function in cell shape modulation . Cell . 2003 ; 113 : 37 ‐ 47 . 12679033 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00163-6 130 Sullivan SE , Liao M , Smith RV , et al. Candidate‐based screening via gene modulation in human neurons and astrocytes implicates FERMT2 in A β and TAU proteostasis . Hum Mol Genet . 2019 ; 28 : 718 ‐ 735 . 30371777 10.1093/hmg/ddy376 PMC6381320 131 Chapuis J , Flaig A , Grenier‐Boley B , et al. Genome‐wide, high‐content siRNA screening identifies the Alzheimer's genetic risk factor FERMT2 as a major modulator of APP metabolism . Acta Neuropathol . 2017 ; 133 : 955 ‐ 966 . 27933404 10.1007/s00401-016-1652-z PMC5427165 132 Bossard C , Bresson D , Polishchuk RS , Malhotra V . Dimeric PKD regulates membrane fission to form transport carriers at the TGN . J Cell Biol . 2007 ; 179 : 1123 ‐ 1131 . 18086912 10.1083/jcb.200703166 PMC2140039 133 Esteban‐Martos A , Brokate‐Llanos AM , Real LM , et al. A functional pipeline of genome‐wide association data leads to Midostaurin as a repurposed drug for Alzheimer's disease . Int J Mol Sci . 2023 ; 24 : 12079 . 37569459 10.3390/ijms241512079 PMC10418421 134 Nasrabady SE , Rizvi B , Goldman JE , Brickman AM . White matter changes in Alzheimer's disease: a focus on myelin and oligodendrocytes . Acta Neuropathol Commun . 2018 ; 6 : 1 ‐ 10 . 29499767 10.1186/s40478-018-0515-3 PMC5834839 135 Redolat R , Mesa‐Gresa P . Potential benefits and limitations of enriched environments and cognitive activity on age‐related behavioural decline . Behav Neurobiol Aging . 2012 : 293 ‐ 316 . 10.1007/7854_2011_134 21643900 136 Molina LAG , Dekker AD , De Deyn PP , Dolga AM , Rots MG . Epigenetics and Down syndrome . Neuropsychiatric Disorders and Epigenetics . Elsevier ; 2024 : 139 ‐ 181 . 137 Yu YE , Xing Z , Do C , Pao A , Lee EJ , Krinsky‐McHale S , et al. Genetic and epigenetic pathways in Down syndrome: insights to the brain and immune system from humans and mouse models . Prog Brain Res . 2020 ; 251 : 1 ‐ 28 . 32057305 10.1016/bs.pbr.2019.09.002 PMC7286740 138 El Hajj N , Dittrich M , Böck J , et al. Epigenetic dysregulation in the developing Down syndrome cortex . Epigenetics . 2016 ; 11 : 563 ‐ 578 . 27245352 10.1080/15592294.2016.1192736 PMC4990229 139 Xu K , Li S , Muskens IS , et al. Accelerated epigenetic aging in newborns with Down syndrome . Aging Cell . 2022 ; 21 : e13652 . 35661546 10.1111/acel.13652 PMC9282838 140 Horvath S . DNA methylation age of human tissues and cell types . Genome Biol . 2013 ; 14 : R115 . 24138928 10.1186/gb-2013-14-10-r115 PMC4015143 141 Horvath S , Garagnani P , Bacalini MG , et al. Accelerated epigenetic aging in Down syndrome . Aging Cell . 2015 ; 14 : 491 ‐ 495 . 25678027 10.1111/acel.12325 PMC4406678 142 Smith RG , Pishva E , Shireby G , et al. A meta‐analysis of epigenome‐wide association studies in Alzheimer's disease highlights novel differentially methylated loci across cortex . Nat Commun . 2021 ; 12 : 3517 . 34112773 10.1038/s41467-021-23243-4 PMC8192929 143 Delaval B , Doxsey SJ . Pericentrin in cellular function and disease . J Cell Biol . 2010 ; 188 : 181 ‐ 190 . 19951897 10.1083/jcb.200908114 PMC2812529 144 Wu J , Akhmanova A . Microtubule‐organizing centers . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . 2017 ; 33 : 51 ‐ 75 . 28645217 10.1146/annurev-cellbio-100616-060615 145 Ocón B , Pan J , Dinh TT , et al. A mucosal and cutaneous chemokine ligand for the lymphocyte chemoattractant receptor GPR15 . Front Immunol . 2017 ; 8 : 1111 . 28936214 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01111 PMC5594226 146 Maretzky T , McIlwain DR , Issuree PDA , et al. iRhom2 controls the substrate selectivity of stimulated ADAM17‐dependent ectodomain shedding . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 2013 ; 110 : 11433 ‐ 11438 . 23801765 10.1073/pnas.1302553110 PMC3710827 147 Zhang W , Stanimirovic DB . The transport systems of the blood‐brain barrier . The blood‐brain barrier and its microenvironment: basic physiology to neurological disease . 2005 ; 103 : 142 . 148 Shin J , Salameh JS , Richter JD . Impaired neurodevelopment by the low complexity domain of CPEB4 reveals a convergent pathway with neurodegeneration . Sci Rep . 2016 ; 6 : 29395 . 27381259 10.1038/srep29395 PMC4933966 149 Dahl E , Manthey D , Chen Y , et al. Molecular cloning and functional expression of mouse connexin‐30,a gap junction gene highly expressed in adult brain and skin . J Biol Chem . 1996 ; 271 : 17903 ‐ 17910 . 8663509 10.1074/jbc.271.30.17903 150 Kajiwara Y , Wang E , Wang M , et al. GJA1 (connexin43) is a key regulator of Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis . Acta Neuropathol Commun . 2018 ; 6 : 1 ‐ 20 . 30577786 10.1186/s40478-018-0642-x PMC6303945 151 Chen YW , Das M , Oyarzabal EA , et al. Genetic identification of a population of noradrenergic neurons implicated in attenuation of stress‐related responses . Mol Psychiatry . 2019 ; 24 : 710 ‐ 725 . 30214043 10.1038/s41380-018-0245-8 PMC6416086 152 Lomash RM , Gu X , Youle RJ , Lu W , Roche KW . Neurolastin, a dynamin family GTPase, regulates excitatory synapses and spine density . Cell Rep . 2015 ; 12 : 743 ‐ 751 . 26212327 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.064 PMC4567839 153 Tsou J‐H , Yang Y‐C , Pao P‐C , et al. Important roles of ring finger protein 112 in embryonic vascular development and brain functions . Mol Neurobiol . 2017 ; 54 : 2286 ‐ 2300 . 26951452 10.1007/s12035-016-9812-7 154 Mehak SF , Sahu V , Shivakumar AB , Gangadharan G , Kabekkodu SP . Epigenetic therapy for Alzheimer's disease . Deciphering Drug Targets for Alzheimer's Disease . Springer ; 2023 : 199 ‐ 217 . 155 Gupta R , Ambasta RK , Kumar P . Pharmacological intervention of histone deacetylase enzymes in the neurodegenerative disorders . Life Sci . 2020 ; 243 : 117278 . 31926248 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.117278 156 Liu XS , Jaenisch R . Editing the epigenome to tackle brain disorders . Trends Neurosci . 2019 ; 42 : 861 ‐ 870 . 31706628 10.1016/j.tins.2019.10.003 157 Migliore L , Coppedè F . Gene–environment interactions in Alzheimer disease: the emerging role of epigenetics . Nat Rev Neurol . 2022 ; 18 : 643 ‐ 660 . 36180553 10.1038/s41582-022-00714-w 158 Schworer EK , Handen BL , Petersen M , et al. Cognitive and functional performance and plasma biomarkers of early Alzheimer's disease in Down syndrome . Alzheimers Dement (Amst) . 2024 ; 16 : e12582 . 38623384 10.1002/dad2.12582 PMC11016818 159 Pires G , McElligott S , Drusinsky S , et al. Secernin‐1 is a novel phosphorylated tau binding protein that accumulates in Alzheimer's disease and not in other tauopathies . Acta Neuropathol Commun . 2019 ; 7 : 195 . 31796108 10.1186/s40478-019-0848-6 PMC6892024 160 Bai B , Vanderwall D , Li Y , et al. Proteomic landscape of Alzheimer's Disease: novel insights into pathogenesis and biomarker discovery . Mol Neurodegener . 2021 ; 16 : 55 . 34384464 10.1186/s13024-021-00474-z PMC8359598 161 Peña‐Bautista C , Baquero M , Vento M . Cháfer‐Pericás C. Omics‐based biomarkers for the early Alzheimer disease diagnosis and reliable therapeutic targets development . Curr Neuropharmacol . 2019 ; 17 : 630 ‐ 647 . 30255758 10.2174/1570159X16666180926123722 PMC6712290 162 Kiddle SJ , Steves CJ , Mehta M , et al. Plasma protein biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease endophenotypes in asymptomatic older twins: early cognitive decline and regional brain volumes . Translational psychiatry . 2015 ; 5 : e584 . 26080319 10.1038/tp.2015.78 PMC4490288 163 Bamburg JR , Bloom GS . Cytoskeletal pathologies of Alzheimer disease . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton . 2009 ; 66 : 635 ‐ 649 . 19479823 10.1002/cm.20388 PMC2754410 164 Pelucchi S , Stringhi R , Marcello E . Dendritic spines in Alzheimer's disease: how the actin cytoskeleton contributes to synaptic failure . Int J Mol Sci . 2020 ; 21 : 908 . 32019166 10.3390/ijms21030908 PMC7036943 165 Erickson MA , Banks WA . Blood–brain barrier dysfunction as a cause and consequence of Alzheimer's disease . J Cereb Blood Flow Metab . 2013 ; 33 : 1500 ‐ 1513 . 23921899 10.1038/jcbfm.2013.135 PMC3790938 166 Zenaro E , Piacentino G , Constantin G . The blood‐brain barrier in Alzheimer's disease . Neurobiol Dis . 2017 ; 107 : 41 ‐ 56 . 27425887 10.1016/j.nbd.2016.07.007 PMC5600438 167 Holmes C , Cunningham C , Zotova E , et al. Systemic inflammation and disease progression in Alzheimer disease . Neurology . 2009 ; 73 : 768 ‐ 774 . 19738171 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b6bb95 PMC2848584 168 Rossi B , Constantin G , Zenaro E . The emerging role of neutrophils in neurodegeneration . Immunobiol . 2020 ; 225 : 151865 . 10.1016/j.imbio.2019.10.014 31740077 169 Dong Y , Lagarde J , Xicota L , et al. Neutrophil hyperactivation correlates with Alzheimer's disease progression . Ann Neurol . 2018 ; 83 : 387 ‐ 405 . 29369398 10.1002/ana.25159 170 Estrada LD , Oliveira‐Cruz L , Cabrera D . Transforming growth factor beta type I role in neurodegeneration: implications for Alzheimer s disease . Curr Protein Pept Sci . 2018 ; 19 : 1180 ‐ 1188 . 29189146 10.2174/1389203719666171129094937 171 Yang Z , Zou Y , Wang L . Neurotransmitters in prevention and treatment of Alzheimer's disease . Int J Mol Sci . 2023 ; 24 : 3841 . 36835251 10.3390/ijms24043841 PMC9966535 172 Liu Y , Edwards RH . The role of vesicular transport proteins in synaptic transmission and neural degeneration . Annu Rev Neurosci . 1997 ; 20 : 125 ‐ 156 . 9056710 10.1146/annurev.neuro.20.1.125 173 Perdigão C , Barata MA , Araújo MN , Mirfakhar FS , Castanheira JG , Almeida C . Intracellular trafficking mechanisms of synaptic dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease . Frontiers in cellular neuroscience . 2020 ; 14 : 72 . 32362813 10.3389/fncel.2020.00072 PMC7180223 174 Ponimaskin E , Voyno‐Yasenetskaya T , Richter DW , Schachner M , Dityatev A . Morphogenic signaling in neurons via neurotransmitter receptors and small GTPases . Mol Neurobiol . 2007 ; 35 : 278 ‐ 287 . 17917116 10.1007/s12035-007-0023-0 175 Balbach JJ , Petkova AT , Oyler NA , et al. Supramolecular structure in full‐length Alzheimer's β‐amyloid fibrils: evidence for a parallel β‐sheet organization from solid‐state nuclear magnetic resonance . Biophys J . 2002 ; 83 : 1205 ‐ 1216 . 12124300 10.1016/S0006-3495(02)75244-2 PMC1302222 176 Loving BA , Bruce KD . Lipid and lipoprotein metabolism in microglia . Front Physiol . 2020 ; 11 : 393 . 32411016 10.3389/fphys.2020.00393 PMC7198855 177 Yu Y , Chu P‐Y , Bowser DN , et al. Mice deficient for the chromosome 21 ortholog Itsn1 exhibit vesicle‐trafficking abnormalities . Hum Mol Genet . 2008 ; 17 : 3281 ‐ 3290 . 18676989 10.1093/hmg/ddn224 178 Hunter MP , Nelson M , Kurzer M , et al. Intersectin 1 contributes to phenotypes in vivo: implications for Down's syndrome . Neuroreport . 2011 ; 22 : 767 ‐ 772 . 21876463 10.1097/WNR.0b013e32834ae348 PMC3339866 179 Drummond E , Kavanagh T , Pires G , et al. The amyloid plaque proteome in early onset Alzheimer's disease and Down syndrome . Acta Neuropathol Commun . 2022 ; 10 : 53 . 35418158 10.1186/s40478-022-01356-1 PMC9008934 180 Vannahme C , Smyth N , Miosge N , et al. Characterization of SMOC‐1, a novel modular calcium‐binding protein in basement membranes . J Biol Chem . 2002 ; 277 : 37977 ‐ 37986 . 12130637 10.1074/jbc.M203830200 181 Roberts JA , Varma VR , Candia J , et al. Unbiased proteomics and multivariable regularized regression techniques identify SMOC1, NOG, APCS, and NTN1 in an Alzheimer's disease brain proteomic signature . npj Aging . 2023 ; 9 : 18 . 37414805 10.1038/s41514-023-00112-6 PMC10326005 182 Perluigi M , Di Domenico F , Buttterfield DA . Unraveling the complexity of neurodegeneration in brains of subjects with Down syndrome: insights from proteomics . PROTEOMICS–Clinical Applications . 2014 ; 8 : 73 ‐ 85 . 24259517 10.1002/prca.201300066 PMC3965623 183 Ebert T , Tran N , Schurgers L , Stenvinkel P , Shiels PG . Ageing–Oxidative stress, PTMs and disease . Mol Aspects Med . 2022 ; 86 : 101099 . 35689974 10.1016/j.mam.2022.101099 184 Schlepckow K , Morenas‐Rodríguez E , Hong S , Haass C . Stimulation of TREM2 with agonistic antibodies—an emerging therapeutic option for Alzheimer's disease . Lancet Neurol . 2023 ; 22 : 1048 ‐ 1060 . 37863592 10.1016/S1474-4422(23)00247-8 185 Bouchon A , Dietrich J , Colonna M . Cutting edge: inflammatory responses can be triggered by TREM‐1, a novel receptor expressed on neutrophils and monocytes . J Immunol . 2000 ; 164 : 4991 ‐ 4995 . 10799849 10.4049/jimmunol.164.10.4991 186 Lundberg E , Borner GH . Spatial proteomics: a powerful discovery tool for cell biology . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2019 ; 20 : 285 ‐ 302 . 30659282 10.1038/s41580-018-0094-y 187 Bai B , Wang X , Li Y , et al. Deep multilayer brain proteomics identifies molecular networks in Alzheimer's disease progression . Neuron . 2020 ; 105 : 975 ‐ 991.e7 . 31926610 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.12.015 PMC7318843 188 Vistain LF , Tay S . Single‐cell proteomics . Trends Biochem Sci . 2021 ; 46 : 661 ‐ 672 . 33653632 10.1016/j.tibs.2021.01.013 PMC11697639 189 Colland F , Jacq X , Trouplin V , et al. Functional proteomics mapping of a human signaling pathway . Genome Res . 2004 ; 14 : 1324 ‐ 1332 . 15231748 10.1101/gr.2334104 PMC442148 190 Wilkins JM , Trushina E . Application of metabolomics in Alzheimer's disease . Front Neurol . 2018 ; 8 : 719 . 29375465 10.3389/fneur.2017.00719 PMC5770363 191 Trushina E , Mielke MM . Recent advances in the application of metabolomics to Alzheimer's Disease . BBA‐Mol Basis Dis . 2014 ; 1842 : 1232 ‐ 1239 . 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.06.014 PMC3842412 23816564 192 Chan RB , Oliveira TG , Cortes EP , et al. Comparative lipidomic analysis of mouse and human brain with Alzheimer disease . J Biol Chem . 2012 ; 287 : 2678 ‐ 2688 . 22134919 10.1074/jbc.M111.274142 PMC3268426 193 Paglia G , Stocchero M , Cacciatore S , et al. Unbiased metabolomic investigation of Alzheimer's disease brain points to dysregulation of mitochondrial aspartate metabolism . J Proteome Res . 2016 ; 15 : 608 ‐ 618 . 26717242 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b01020 PMC5751881 194 Trushina E , Dutta T , Persson X‐MT , Mielke MM , Petersen RC . Identification of altered metabolic pathways in plasma and CSF in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease using metabolomics . PLoS One . 2013 ; 8 : e63644 . 23700429 10.1371/journal.pone.0063644 PMC3658985 195 Dierssen M , Fructuoso M , Martínez de Lagrán M , Perluigi M , Barone E . Down syndrome is a metabolic disease: altered insulin signaling mediates peripheral and brain dysfunctions . Front Neurosci . 2020 ; 14 : 670 . 32733190 10.3389/fnins.2020.00670 PMC7360727 196 Valenti D , Braidy N , De Rasmo D , et al. Mitochondria as pharmacological targets in Down syndrome . Free Radical Biol Med . 2018 ; 114 : 69 ‐ 83 . 28838841 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.08.014 197 Orozco JS , Hertz‐Picciotto I , Abbeduto L , Slupsky CM . Metabolomics analysis of children with autism, idiopathic‐developmental delays, and Down syndrome . Transl Psychiatry . 2019 ; 9 : 243 . 31582732 10.1038/s41398-019-0578-3 PMC6776514 198 Caracausi M , Ghini V , Locatelli C , et al. Plasma and urinary metabolomic profiles of Down syndrome correlate with alteration of mitochondrial metabolism . Sci Rep . 2018 ; 8 : 2977 . 29445163 10.1038/s41598-018-20834-y PMC5813015 199 Antonaros F , Ghini V , Pulina F , et al. Plasma metabolome and cognitive skills in Down syndrome . Sci Rep . 2020 ; 10 : 10491 . 32591596 10.1038/s41598-020-67195-z PMC7319960 200 Buczyńska A , Sidorkiewicz I , Krętowski AJ , Zbucka‐Krętowska M . The role of oxidative stress in trisomy 21 phenotype . Cell Mol Neurobiol . 2023 ; 43 : 3943 ‐ 3963 . 37819608 10.1007/s10571-023-01417-6 PMC10661812 201 Jucker M , Walker LC . Alzheimer's disease: from immunotherapy to immunoprevention . Cell . 2023 ; 186 : 4260 ‐ 4270 . 37729908 10.1016/j.cell.2023.08.021 PMC10578497 202 Aranha MR , Montal V , van den Brink H , et al. Cortical microinfarcts in adults with Down syndrome assessed with 3T‐MRI . Alzheimers Dement . 2024 . 10.1002/alz.13797 PMC11180852 38644660 203 Schoeppe F , Rossi A , Levin J , Reiser M , Stoecklein S , Ertl‐Wagner B . Increased cerebral microbleeds and cortical superficial siderosis in pediatric patients with Down syndrome . Eur J Paediatr Neurol . 2019 ; 23 : 158 ‐ 164 . 30279085 10.1016/j.ejpn.2018.09.004 204 He X , Liu X , Zuo F , Shi H , Jing J . Artificial intelligence‐based multi‐omics analysis fuels cancer precision medicine . Seminars in Cancer Biology . Elsevier ; 2023 : 187 ‐ 200 . 10.1016/j.semcancer.2022.12.009 36596352 205 Tang X‐Y , Xu L , Wang J , t al. DSCAM/PAK1 pathway suppression reverses neurogenesis deficits in iPSC‐derived cerebral organoids from patients with Down syndrome . J Clin Invest . 2021 ; 131 : e135763 . https://www.jci.org/articles/view/135763 33945512 10.1172/JCI135763 PMC8203468 206 Xu R , Brawner AT , Li S , et al. OLIG2 drives abnormal neurodevelopmental phenotypes in human iPSC‐based organoid and chimeric mouse models of down syndrome . Cell stem cell . 2019 ; 24 : 908 ‐ 926.e8 . 31130512 10.1016/j.stem.2019.04.014 PMC6944064 207 Moreno M , Brault V , Birling M‐C , Pavlovic G , Herault Y . Modeling Down syndrome in animals from the early stage to the 4.0 models and next . Prog Brain Res . 2020 ; 251 : 91 ‐ 143 . 32057313 10.1016/bs.pbr.2019.08.001 208 Xu Z , Qu H‐Q , Kao C , Hakonarson H , Wang K . Single‐Cell Omics for Transcriptome CHaracterization (SCOTCH): isoform‐level characterization of gene expression through long‐read single‐cell RNA sequencing . Biorxiv . 2024 . 2024.04.29.590597. 209 Poliakova T , Levin O , Arablinskiy A , Vasenina E , Zerr I . Cerebral microbleeds in early Alzheimer's disease . J Neurol . 2016 ; 263 : 1961 ‐ 1968 . 27389080 10.1007/s00415-016-8220-2